=== 贪心分配异构资源，将服务实例部署在资源利用率最低的节点；路由时始终选择当前位置最近的节点转发请求，追求局部最优资源分配与路由效率。.pdf ===
总页数: 14

--- Page 1 ---
3830 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
Joint Task Ofﬂoading, Resource Allocation and
Model Placement for AI as a Service
in 6G Network
Yuhao Chai , Kaice Gao , Guohan Zhang, Lu Lu , Member, IEEE ,Q i nL i , and Yong Zhang
Abstract —In the future, 6G network is expected to achieve
deep integration of communication and computation, where
computation-centric services will be ubiquitous in the network.
There are differences in data size, computing power types
(CPU/GPU), model complexity, and Quality of Service (QoS) re-
quirements among various CPU computing services and artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) services. By providing AI as a Service (AIaaS)
in 6G network, the deployment of AI models and the scheduling of
task and computing resources can be accelerated. The fundamental
challenge lies in the effective amalgamation of the long-term strat-
egy of the model placement problem and the short-term strategy
of the task scheduling problem to attain dynamic scheduling and
management of tasks and heterogeneous computing resources. A
two-timescale optimization method for joint task ofﬂoading, com-
puting resource allocation and model placement is proposed in
this article. We present an edge-network-cloud framework that
conﬁgures AIaaS functional units, taking into account the hetero-
geneous computing requirements and QoS demands of different
services. A long-term problem to minimize latency and energy
consumption is formulated. To work out the coupled optimization
parameters, the problem is decomposed into short-term deter-
ministic sub-problems using Lyapunov optimization. We propose
low-complexity algorithms for joint task ofﬂoading strategy based
on deferred acceptance algorithm, computing resource allocation
strategy based on convex optimization, and model placement strat-
egy based on multi-armed bandits. Experimental results demon-
strate that our approach outperforms reinforcement learning and
other popular optimization algorithms in terms of complexity and
effectiveness.
Index Terms —6G network, resource allocation, AI as a service
(AIaaS), Lyapunov optimization, deferred acceptance algorithm,
multi-armed bandit.
Received 19 January 2024; revised 10 August 2024; accepted 14 August
2024. Date of publication 28 August 2024; date of current version 30 De-
cember 2024. This work was supported by the Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications-China Mobile Research Institute Joint Innovation Center.
(Corresponding author: Yong Zhang.)
Yuhao Chai and Kaice Gao are with the School of Electronic Engineering,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China
(e-mail: chaiyh@bupt.edu.cn; gaokaice@bupt.edu.cn).
Guohan Zhang is with the School of Science and Key Laboratory of Mathe-
matics and Information Networks, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommu-
nications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail: zhanggh@bupt.edu.cn).
Lu Lu and Qin Li are with the Department of Basic Network Technology
Research, China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail:
lulu@chinamobile.com; liqinyjy@chinamobile.com).
Yong Zhang is with the School of Electronic Engineering and Bei-
jing Key Laboratory of Work Safety Intelligent Monitoring, Beijing Uni-
versity of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China (e-mail:
yongzhang@bupt.edu.cn).
This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2024.3451170, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSC.2024.3451170I. I NTRODUCTION
NETWORK intelligence is one of the visions for future 6G
networks. Through the deep integration of communication
and computation, 6G networks will support massive computing
and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) services, providing enhanced
communication and connectivity capabilities. The computing
resource of 6G networks will extend from “edge-cloud” to
“edge-network-cloud” framework, using ubiquitous computing
resource in the network to offer stable and efﬁcient AI services to
users. Therefore, 6G networks will ﬂexibly allocate computing
resources based on connection, computing power, model and
data requirements, thus improving network energy efﬁciency.
By utilizing distributed heterogeneous computing resources,
6G has the potential to provide low-latency services, alleviate
communication and computing burdens on clouds, and meet the
Quality of Service (QoS) requirements of various communica-
tion and computing services [1]. 6G aims to connect diverse
communication, computation, data, and AI model resources
between the edge, network and cloud, enabling on-demand
resource scheduling. International Telecommunication Union
(ITU) proposed that the 6G network needs to handle intelli-
gent services such as International Mobile Telecommunications-
2030 (IMT-2030) assisted automated driving, AI assisted ex-
treme Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (E-MIMO), ofﬂoading
of heavy computation operations across devices and networks,
creation of and prediction with digital twins, and others [2].
Combined with the concept of edge intelligence, the evolution
of telecom infrastructures towards 6G will consider highly dis-
tributed AI, moving the intelligence from the central cloud to
edge computing resources [3],[4]. This requires 6G network to
efﬁciently manage dedicated computing resources and models
for different types of services, enabling uniﬁed and efﬁcient
resource management.
Providing AI as a Service (AIaaS) in 6G network enables
users to get latency-guaranteed AI services without developing
their own AI systems [5]. In order to meet the varying Quality
of AI Service (QoAIS) requirements of users, new evaluation
system needs to be considered on the basis of existing QoS
system. Therefore, the provision of AIaaS in 6G network needs
comprehensively consider the following aspects of the services:
Latency: Latency is a critical factor that inﬂuences service
quality for both computing tasks and AI tasks. Latency typically
consists of three components: communication latency, queuing
latency, and computing latency. Communication latency is
1939-1374 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 2 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3831
inﬂuenced by the amount of data and the communication
quality. Queuing latency is affected by the length of task queues
in computing nodes. Computing latency is inﬂuenced by factors
such as task workload, model parameters, and remaining
computing power in the nodes. Designing appropriate task
scheduling algorithms can greatly improve the users’ experience
for latency-sensitive services.
Energy Consumption: Data transmission and computation in
AI tasks result in signiﬁcant energy consumption. Due to the
limited computing power of each server, a trade-off must be
considered between energy consumption and latency to ensure
both improved energy efﬁciency and meeting the users’ latency
requirements [6]. Task ofﬂoading decisions and computing re-
source allocation are the primary research directions for opti-
mizing energy consumption.
Heterogeneous Computing Demands: Different types of tasks
require different types and scales of computing resources, such
as CPUs, GPUs, TPUs, etc., to support their computing needs.
Large-scale training and inference tasks often require GPU
clusters rather than a single GPU for computation. CPU-GPU
heterogeneous computing is also employed to enhance the
computing and latency performance of AI models [7]. Con-
sequently, the coupling of heterogeneous computing resource
demands complicates the allocation problem. Computing nodes
need serve multiple tasks simultaneously and deploy multiple
containers to reduce communication costs or balance workload,
presenting new challenges for dynamic resource management
and task ofﬂoading [8]. Thus intelligent orchestration solutions
is helpful to support the constantly growing requirements of
intelligent applications [9],[10].
Model Requirements: Artiﬁcial intelligence tasks usually ne-
cessitate the delegation of duties to servers that possess ample
computing resources to carry out the tasks through particular
models [11]. With the emergence of techniques such as pruning
and early-exit, multiple variants of models may complete the
same AI task, with varying parameter sizes and architectures
that affect inference accuracy and computing time. Currently,
most existing AI services lack a balance between efﬁciency and
performance during deployment [12]. Supporting AI tasks in
6G network requires considering the deployment of multiple
models, so as to provide customized QoS for users. On one
hand, it is necessary to ensure that tasks with different QoS
requirements are ofﬂoaded to nearby nodes with appropriate
models to guarantee overall latency. On the other hand, it is
also essential to ensure that nodes have sufﬁcient computing
hardware and facilities to support the deployment of models
with different complexities.
According to the different types of computing power used, we
can divide 6G services into CPU based computing services and
GPU based AI services, hereinafter referred to as computing
tasks and AI tasks. In summary, to realize 6G network that
supports both existing computing tasks and AI tasks, dynamic
task ofﬂoading, computing resource allocation, and model place-
ment strategies must be designed, as shown in Fig. 1, short-
time strategies and long-time strategies mutual inﬂuence on
each other’s subsequent decisions. AI models are deployed by
transferring containerized instances from cloud nodes or model
Fig. 1. Strategy decision at different timescales.
repositories to computing nodes that are equipped with CPUs
or GPUs. Tasks are ofﬂoaded from edge nodes to computing
node, with certain tasks necessitating speciﬁc models and com-
puting resource for accurate calculations. The task ofﬂoading
(including node selection and model selection) and computing
resource allocation need to be considered in every time slot as a
short timescale problem, while model placement is decided with
several time slots interval, as a long timescale problem. In this
paper, we focus on the AIaaS architecture for the aforementioned
multi-service 6G network, which comprehensively ensures the
service quality of computing and AI tasks from various dimen-
sions such as communication, computation, data, and AI model
resources [13]. The above strategies can be formulated as a
two-timescale mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP)
problem, aiming to minimize latency and energy consumption
while meeting users’ QoS requirements. Speciﬁcally, the con-
tributions of this paper are as follows:
1) The functional units of AIaaS in 6G network is constructed,
establishing the communication, queuing, and computing mod-
els for joint task ofﬂoading, computing resource allocation, and
model placement in the two-timescale within the edge-network-
cloud architecture. To address the heterogeneity of computing
resources in the 6G network, we consider different types and
scales of computing power in computing nodes, as well as
different models and QoAIS features.
2) The Lyapunov optimization is employed to decompose the
long-term system stability problem into short-term deterministic
sub-problems for minimizing latency and energy consumption.
A task ofﬂoading mechanism based on deferred acceptance (DA)
algorithm is proposed, achieving optimal assignment of different
types of services among computing nodes. To ensure differenti-
ated QoS requirements, a dynamic workload allocation strategy
and a frequency strategy among heterogeneous computing units
on computing nodes based on convex optimization theory are
proposed.
3) To address the diverse QoAIS and model selection require-
ments for AI tasks, a joint model placement and model selection
strategy is proposed based on a long-short-term mechanism. In
the absence of prior knowledge of future task information, the
multi-armed bandit (MAB) mechanism is used to periodically
evaluate the model placement strategy on computing nodes, im-
proving the system’s communication and computation efﬁciency
by re-deploying models.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 3 ---
3832 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
The rest of the paper is summarized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce related work. Section IIIis system model and
problem formulation. Section IVis the process of problem
solving. Section Vis the simulation results to evaluate our
deferred acceptance-multi-armed bandits (DA-MAB) strategy.
Finally, we summarize our work in Section VI.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Task Ofﬂoading and Resource Allocation
Task ofﬂoading and resource allocation have been extensively
studied in scenarios such as edge computing, fog computing,
and cloud computing. Edge intelligence is an emerging comput-
ing and communication paradigm that enables AI functionality
at the network edge [14]. To alleviate the computing burden
on the end and cloud sides, computing tasks are ofﬂoaded to
edge nodes, cloud nodes, or data centers for computation [15].
Communication and computing resources, such as transmit
power, channel and computing resource, are optimized based
on different scenarios. Convex optimization, game theory, and
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) methods
have been applied to optimize continuous resource allocation
problems. Matching theory, integer optimization, particle swarm
optimization (PSO), and other methods have been applied to op-
timize discrete task ofﬂoading problems. Besides, reinforcement
learning (RL), including MAB theory, deep Q-network (DQN),
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO), multi-agent learning, etc.,
is playing a growing and important role in resource allocation
problems for the edge [16].
In the ﬁeld of ﬁne-grained computing power management
and accelerated computation of AI models, multi-GPU and
CPU-GPU cooperation have emerged as new research trends. A
clustered multi-core platform was proposed to handle the energy
consumption model during intra-task processing [17]. Zeng et
al. deployed edge learning in an architecture that utilizes parallel
computing using both CPU and GPU, dynamically allocate
bandwidth, divide CPU-GPU workloads, and perform speed
scaling at each device [18]. A similar problem was addressed
in[19], where the Lagrangian dual method was employed to
obtain optimal processor frequency and dataset size allocations.
The ﬁne-grained task deployment problem in multi-CPU-GPU
cores was tackled using a cooperative dual-population evolu-
tionary algorithm, maximizing average QoS [20]. Fine-grained
resource management and heterogeneous collaborative comput-
ing contribute to further reducing task execution time and energy
consumption.
B. Model Placement
Due to the heavy communication and energy costs associ-
ated with frequent model re-deployment from cloud nodes or
model repositories, the model placement problem is typically
a long timescale problem compared to task ofﬂoading. The
model placement problem shares commonalities between model
training optimization and model inference optimization. The
optimization objective is typically to reduce overall latencyand energy consumption and is sometimes combined with dis-
tributed computing techniques. Even if there are complex de-
pendencies between these training or inference tasks, they can
still be modeled as directed acyclic graphs and transformed into
chain-like or independent temporal tasks [21].
On the edge side, model placement is often jointly optimized
with model partitioning. For example, MAB is used to intelli-
gently determine the semantic and layer-wise splitting strategies
of edge-end models [22]. The concept of edge AIaaS is proposed
to improve the energy and latency performance of AI services
through management of data quality and model complexity [5].
Additionally, placement of the edge servers is also helpful for
the time and energy optimization in edge computing [23].
C. Two-Timescale Resource Allocation
The two-timescale optimization problem involves multiple
network management in two time dimensions. It often re-
quires effective problem decomposition and the design of dif-
ferent algorithms to optimize each sub-problem. Wei et al.
[24] proposed a two-timescale optimization algorithm for re-
source placement and task dispatching in edge-clouds. Similar
problems in related scenarios were addressed in [25], where
a low-complexity optimization scheme combining Lyapunov
optimization, ADMM, and matching theory was used. In Fog
Radio Access Networks, small-scale computing resource allo-
cation problems were optimized using coalition game theory,
while large-scale service caching problems were addressed us-
ing multi-agent RL [26]. The long-term stochastic optimization
problem in non-orthogonal multiple access edge computing was
decomposed into three sub-problems: resource block allocation
on a long timescale, task partitioning and computing resource
allocation on a short timescale. These sub-problems were solved
using swap matching and relaxed convex optimization. The
long-term collaborative inference problem in cloud-edge-end
was transformed into a deterministic problem for each time
slot using Lyapunov optimization. By combining deep rein-
forcement learning (DRL) and low-complexity algorithms, the
training complexity of the DRL was reduced [27].
III. S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. System Model
In this study, a three-tier edge-network-cloud 6G network
architecture is considered to support both computing and AI
services in an AIaaS framework. As shown in Fig. 2, tasks
are aggregated at edge nodes and transmitted to computing
nodes or cloud nodes for processing. Different types of services
have distinct QoS requirements. For instance, communication
protocol processing and computing analysis heavily rely on the
CPU computing capabilities. Training tasks demand more GPU
computing power, while inference tasks require low latency and
inference accuracy. To enhance the efﬁciency of AI services, we
assume that some computing nodes support GPU-CPU acceler-
ation for training and inference tasks.
To achieve uniﬁed orchestration and management of tasks,
it is important to ﬁrst segment the user’s tasks and monitor the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 4 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3833
Fig. 2. System architecture of the network.
Fig. 3. AIaaS framework in 6G network.
QoS. The overall user task may consist of multiple sub-tasks,
and by dividing the task into independent sub-tasks with dif-
ferent QoS and computing power requirements, it facilitates the
development of ﬁne-grained orchestration strategies. By setting
up managers in the network to collect information about the
network and nodes, and dynamically replace models and ofﬂoad
tasks, users ofﬂoad computing services on nearby nodes using
appropriate models while ensuring QoS requirements, which
helps prevent wastage of computing resources and overload
situations on nodes.
To accommodate the diverse requirements of these services,
conﬁgurable functional units are introduced, as shown in Fig. 3.
The notations and symbols are given in Table I. These units
include:
Service Split Manager: The service split manager is respon-
sible for dividing tasks with dependencies or distributed charac-
teristics into a series of single-destination node task sequences
with temporal relationships. We divide the task according to
the segmentation strategy in [21]. Additionally, the service split
manager is responsible for categorizing the split tasks. All tasks
can be divided into a set I={1,2,...,I}, where task iarrives
in time slots T={0,1,2,...,T}, the duration of each time slot
isTslot,Ci(t)represents the data of task iat time slot t,∀i∈I.
Service Quality Manager: The service quality manager is
responsible for receiving information from service split manager
and managing the QoS requirements of services. Speciﬁcally,
γC
i(t)andγG
i(t)determine the number of CPU and GPU coresTABLE I
NOTATIONS AND SYMBOLS
needed to execute task i. The maximum allowable delay for
taskiisDi(t). Additionally, qmin
i is an optional parameter for
AI inference services, representing the accuracy requirement of
taski.
Model Complexity Manager: The model complexity manager
is responsible for managing the model repository and parameters
of AI models. The model repository includes models applicable
to different types of AI services, as well as different versions
of the same model. The set of AI models is denoted as K=
{0,1,2,...,K}, wherek=0represents no model is needed for
task computing. The QoAIS for AI model kinclude accuracy ak
and model complexity ratio bk. Accuracy measures the inference
quality of AI inference services, while the model complexity
ratio is the ratio of the processing density of model kto the
processing density L(in cycles/bit) of standard computing tasks.
The remaining parameters related to QoS will be introduced in
the following managers.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 5 ---
3834 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
B. Decision Manager
Decision manager consists of the task ofﬂoading manager and
the model placement manager, responsible for periodically up-
dating model placements on each computing node and devising
node selection and resource allocation strategies for tasks in each
time slot.
Task Ofﬂoading Manager: The task ofﬂoading manager regu-
larly interacts with the service quality manager to obtain QoS re-
quirements and communicates with computing nodes to acquire
node computing capabilities and communication conditions.
The task ofﬂoading manager receives node information related
to a set of computing nodes J={1,2,...,J}, where node jhas
CPU core count QC,max
j , maximum CPU operating frequency
fC,max
j , GPU core count QG,max
j , maximum GPU operating
frequency fG,max
j , maximum number of deployed models αmax
j,
set of deployable models Kjat nodej, the current set of models
{αj,k(t)}deployed on node j, task queue set {Zi,j(t)}for task
iat nodej, CPU computing energy coefﬁcient εC
jat nodej, and
GPU computing energy coefﬁcient εG
jat nodej. Here,αmax
j
andKjare determined by the computing, memory and storage
capacity of node j, where nodes with larger computing capacity
can deploy a greater variety and number of candidate models.1
Communication information includes network topology, the set
of link transmission rate {Ri,j(t)}, and the set of hops {di,j}.
At the beginning of each time slot, the task ofﬂoading manager
determines the task ofﬂoading strategy and resource alloca-
tion strategy. The decision variables are as follows: At time t,
βi,j,k(t)=1 denotes that task iuses model kon nodejfor
computation. Speciﬁcally, βi,j(t)=/summationtext
kβi,j,k(t)=1 indicates
that task iis ofﬂoaded to node j. The decision variables also
include the amount of task workload allocated to the CPU on
nodej,WC
i,j(t); the amount of task workload allocated to the
GPU on node j,WG
i,j(t); the optimal operating frequency of
the CPU for task ion nodej,fC
i,j(t); and the optimal operating
frequency of the GPU, fG
i,j(t).
Model Placement Manager: The model placement manager
regularly communicates with computing nodes and the model
complexity manager to coordinate model placement strategies.
The model placement manager obtains the indicator vi,kfrom
the model complexity manager. If vi,k=1, it indicates that
taskican be computed by model k. The models deployed on
nodes can be reused for different tasks in the form of contain-
ers[28]. Based on historical information received from the task
ofﬂoading manager, at the beginning of each T0time slots,
the model placement manager determines the set of deployed
models{αj,k(t)}on each node j, whereαj,k(t)=1 indicates
that model kis deployed on node jat timetand remains
unchanged for the next T0time slots.
1If the deployed models have signiﬁcantly different parameter sizes, the
domain of αj,k(t)can be extended to non-negative real numbers in constraint
(1), or set other parameters and constraints to better characterize the hardware
requirements of the models. The supposed DA and MAB strategy introduced
below supports the above extension.For the decision managers, the constraints can be expressed
as follows:
/summationdisplay
kαj,k(t)≤αmax
j,∀j∈J, (1)
Equation (1)indicates that the number of AI model deployed
by computing node jdoes not exceed αmax
j. Based on the
requirements of the task and limitations of the node computing
power, we have constraints
/summationdisplay
iβi,j(t)γC
i(t)≤QC,max
j,∀j∈J, (2)
/summationdisplay
iβi,j(t)γG
i(t)≤QG,max
j,∀j∈J, (3)
Equation (2)and(3)indicate that the number of CPU and GPU
cores used by all tasks at computing node jat the same time
does not exceed the node resource limit. Each task can only be
ofﬂoaded to one computing node for computation within the
same time slot. Therefore, we have constraints
/summationdisplay
jβi,j(t)≤1,∀i∈I. (4)
The workload segmentation of each task on the CPU and GPU
cores should meet the conditions (5)–(7), wherebi,k=vi,k∗bk
WC
i,j(t)+WG
i,j(t)=/summationdisplay
kβi,j,k(t)bi,kLCi(t),∀i∈I,∀j∈J,
(5)
0≤WC
i,j(t),∀i∈I,∀j∈J, (6)
0≤WG
i,j(t),∀i∈I,∀j∈J, (7)
wherebi,kLCi(t)is the workload of task iusing model k, and
the unit of Lis cycle/bit. (5)indicates the allocation relationship
between the workload of task ion the CPU and GPU, while (6)
and(7)specify that the amount of workload is non-negative.
According to the different CPU/GPU types of computing
nodes, the optimal operating frequency should not exceed its
frequency upper limit
fC
i,j(t)≤fC,max
j,∀i∈I,∀j∈J, (8)
fG
i,j(t)≤fG,max
j,∀i∈I,∀j∈J. (9)
AI inference services should meet condition (10) to meet the
minimum inference accuracy requirements of the services. qmin
i
for other services can be set to 0.
/summationdisplay
j/summationdisplay
kβi,j,k(t)ak≥qmin
i,∀i∈I. (10)
C. Delay and Energy Consumption Model
After task ofﬂoading manager makes the task ofﬂoading de-
cision, all tasks are transmitted to the target computing nodes
following the shortest path. The total latency of a task consists of
transmission latency, queuing latency and computation latency.
The total energy consumption of a task consists of transmission
energy consumption and computation energy consumption. At
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 6 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3835
timet, the transmission latency for task ican be calculated as
follows:
DT
i(t)=/summationdisplay
jβi,j(t)di,jCi(t)
Ri,j(t). (11)
The transmission energy consumption is
ET
i(t)=/summationdisplay
jβi,j(t)εd
idi,jCi(t)
Ri,j(t), (12)
whereεd
iis the transmission energy consumption coefﬁcient.
The computation latency is determined by the later comple-
tion time between CPU and GPU workload
DCom
i(t)=/summationdisplay
jmax/braceleftBigg
WC
i,j(t)
γC
i(t)fC
i,j(t),WG
i,j(t)
γG
i(t)fG
i,j(t)/bracerightBigg
.(13)
The computation energy consumption is
ECom
i(t)=/summationdisplay
j/parenleftBig
εC
jWC
i,j(t)/parenleftbig
fC
i,j(t)/parenrightbig2+εG
jWG
i,j(t)/parenleftbig
fG
i,j(t)/parenrightbig2/parenrightBig
,
(14)
whereεC
jis the computing energy consumption coefﬁcient for
the CPU of node j,εG
jis the computing energy consumption
coefﬁcient for the GPU of node j.
D. Data Queue Model
The data ofﬂoaded by task ito a computing node jcan be
viewed as a data queue over time. If the amount of data from the
task exceeds the computing capacity of the node, it will result in
queue buildup and increase the queuing latency for tasks. The
task queue for task iat computing node jat timetisZi,j(t).
Based on the data amount of the tasks and the resource allocation
strategy, the queues update as
Zi,j(t+1)=max {Zi,j(t)−xi,j(t),0}+yi,j(t),(15)
xi,j(t)=/summationdisplay
kvi,kβi,j,k(t)αj,k(t)Tslot
·/bracketleftbig
γC
i(t)fC
i,j(t)+γG
i(t)fG
i,j(t)/bracketrightbig
, (16)
yi,j(t)=/summationdisplay
kβi,j,k(t)bi,kLCi(t), (17)
wherexi,j(t)is the maximum amount of data computing of task
iat computing node jduring[t,t+1) .yi,j(t)is taskirequired
computing power for using model kcalculating at node jat time
slott+1. The long-term stability conditions of Zi,j(t)are
lim
t→∞1
tt−1/summationdisplay
τ=0E[Zi,j(τ)] = 0. (18)
According to Little’s Law, the average latency is a function of
queue length and arrival rate. We deﬁne the delay violation prob-
ability as the probability that the average queue delay exceeds
the delay requirement DQ
i, and we aim to impose constraints on
the delay violation probability. Thus, we decompose the delay
requirement Di(t)into three components: the queue delay upper
limitDQ
i, the time-varying transmission delay DT
i(t), and thecomputing delay DCom
i(t).W eu s eDQ
ias the maximum value
of the queue delay and optimize the transmission delay DT
i(t)
and computing delay DCom
i(t)through resource allocation.
Consequently, the delay requirement can be formulated as
DQ∗
i(t)=
lim
t→∞1
tt−1/summationtext
τ=0yi,j(τ)
/braceleftbigg
lim
t→∞1
tt−1/summationtext
τ=0xi,j(τ)/bracerightbigg/braceleftbigg
lim
t→∞1
tt−1/summationtext
τ=0(xi,j(τ)−yi,j(τ))/bracerightbigg≤DQ
i,
(19)
DT
i(t)+DCom
i(t)+DQ
i≤Di(t). (20)
E. Problem Formulation
To maximize the efﬁciency of the network, we need
to perform multivariate optimization at two different time
scales: long-term model placement strategy, short-term task
ofﬂoading and computing resource allocation strategy. The
overall objective of the optimization is to minimize la-
tency and energy consumption while ensuring computing re-
source constraints. Let f1(t)=μ
T∗/summationtext
i(DT
i(t)+DCom
i(t))+
(1−μ)
E∗/summationtext
i(ET
i(t)+ECom
i(t)), then the optimization objective
is
P1: m i n F1= lim
T→∞1
TT0TT0/summationdisplay
t=0f1(t)
s.t. (1)–(10) and(19)–(20), (21)
whereT∗andE∗are normalization coefﬁcients for delay and
energy consumption, μis a adaptive parameters, T0is the
time interval for executing model placement. There are some
challenges in solving problem P1. First, the prior knowledge of
data arrivals is unknown. Second, it involves resource allocation
at different timescales, as shown in Fig. 1, where node selection,
model selection (combined as task ofﬂoading), and computing
resource allocation need to be jointly optimized at each task
arrival interval, while model placement needs to be optimized
at each long time slot T0. Third, P1 is a MINLP that is NP-hard
due to the coupling between long-term constraints and short-
term optimization objectives. Hence, it is more complex than
traditional MINLP.
IV . P ROBLEM SOLVING
In this section, the problem is decomposed by using Lyapunov
optimization ﬁrst. Then obtain the optimal analytical solutions
for workload and frequency by using convex optimization and
solve the node and model selection problem (task ofﬂoading
problem) using the improved DA algorithm. Subsequently, a
model placement strategy based on the Multi-Armed Bandit-
Upper Conﬁdence Bounds (MAB-UCB) algorithm is proposed
and integrate the three algorithms to form the overall DA-MAB
strategy.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 7 ---
3836 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
A. Problem Transformation Based on Lyapunov Optimization
To solve the long-term problem mentioned above, Lyapunov
optimization is introduced to transform the long-term opti-
mization problem into a series of short-term optimization sub-
problems, which are further decomposed at two-timescale. Let
Z(t)={Z1,1(t),Z1,2(t),...,Z I,J(t)}, the Lyapunov function
can be written as
Ly(t)=V1
2⎧
⎨
⎩/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jZ2
i,j(t)⎫
⎬
⎭, (22)
whereV1is the control parameter of the virtual queue. Lyapunov
drift depends on the state of the data queue, as given by the
following equation:
ΔT(Z(t)) =E{Ly(t+T)−Ly(t)|Z(t)}. (23)
Based on inequality ([a−b]++c)2≤a2+b2+c2+2a(c−
b), for each Zi,j(t),w eh a v e
Ly(t+1)−Ly(t)=V1
2/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
j/bracketleftbig
Z2
i,j(t+1)−Z2
i,j(t)/bracketrightbig
=V1
2/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
j/braceleftbig
([Zi,j(t)−xi,j(t)]++yi,j(t))2−Z2
i,j(t)/bracerightbig
≤V1
2/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
j/braceleftbig
x2
i,j(t)+y2
i,j(t)+2Zi,j(t)[yi,j(t)−xi,j(t)]/bracerightbig
.
(24)
Let the result on the right side of the above inequality as
Lynew(t). By using the law of telescoping sums in t∈
[TT0,(T+1)T0)to get
Ly((T+1)T0)−Ly(TT0)≤(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0Lynew(t).(25)
Therefore, we get
ΔT0(Z(t)) =E{Ly(t+T0)−Ly(t)|Z(t)}
≤E⎧
⎨
⎩(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0Lynew(t)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleZ(t)⎫
⎬
⎭≤V1
2BT0
+V1E⎧
⎨
⎩(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jZi,j(t)[yi,j(t)−xi,j(t)]/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleZ(t)⎫
⎬
⎭,
(26)
whereB=I·J·(x2
max+y2
max)is a constant. Let
xC
i,j(t)=(/summationtext
kvi,kαj,k(TT0)βi,j,k(t))γC
i(t)fC
i,j(t)Tslot,
xG
i,j(t)=(/summationtext
kvi,kαj,k(TT0)βi,j,k(t))γG
i(t)fG
i,j(t)Tslot,b y
using Lyapunov Drift-Plus-Penalty (DPP) method [29],t h e
objective function F1in problem P1 is considered a penaltyfunction. Then, the DPP function is represented as
E⎧
⎨
⎩ΔT0(Z(t))+(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0V2f1(t)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleZ(t)⎫
⎬
⎭≤V1
2BT0
+V1E⎧
⎨
⎩(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jZi,j(t)(yi,j(t)−xi,j(t))/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleZ(t)⎫
⎬
⎭
+V2E⎧
⎨
⎩(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0f1(t)/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingleZ(t)⎫
⎬
⎭. (27)
In the above equation, Bis a constant. According to Lyapunov
optimization, problem P1 can be transformed into minimize the
problem on the right side of the equation in each T0time slot
and include constraints C1-C10. Therefore, the long-term opti-
mization problem is transformed into a short-term optimization
problem as P2.
P2: m i n F2/parenleftbig
αj,k,βi,j,k,WC
i,j,WG
i,j,fC
i,j,fG
i,j/parenrightbig
=(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
j(Xi,j(t)+Yi,j(t)+Gi,j(t)
+Hi,j(t))
s.t. (1)–(10) and(20) (28)
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩Xi,j(t)=V1Zi,j(t)yi,j(t)+V2μ
T∗DT
i(t)+V2(1−μ)
E∗ET
i(t),
Yi,j(t)=V2μ
T∗DCom
i(t)+V2(1−μ)
E∗ECom
i(t),
Gi,j(t)=−V1Zi,j(t)xC
i,j(t),
Hi,j(t)=−V1Zi,j(t)xG
i,j(t),∀i∈I,∀j∈J,
(29)
whereXi,j(t)only relates to variables βi,j,k(t).Gi,j(t)relates
toαj,k(TT0),βi,j,k(t)andfC
i,j(t).Hi,j(t)relates to αj,k(TT0),
βi,j,k(t)andfG
i,j(t).Yi,j(t)relates to all variables. Thus when
αj,k(TT0)is decided, problem P2 can be decomposed into four
sub-problems
P3.1: m i n F3.1=/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jXi,j(βi,j,k)
s.t. (2)–(4),(10) and(20) (30)
P3.2: m i n F3.2
=/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jYi,j/parenleftbig
βi,j,k,WC
i,j,WG
i,j,fC
i,j,fG
i,j/parenrightbig
s.t. (2)–(3)and(5)–(9) (31)
P3.3: m i n F3.3=/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jGi,j/parenleftbig
αj,k,βi,j,k,fC
i,j/parenrightbig
s.t. (1),(8)and(9) (32)
P3.4: m i n F3.4=/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
jHi,j/parenleftbig
αj,k,βi,j,k,fG
i,j/parenrightbig
s.t. (1),(8)and(9) (33)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 8 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3837
Fig. 4. The overall algorithm process.
P3.1 and P3.2 are single time slot problems aimed at max-
imizing the objective function within each time slot. When
αj,k(TT0)is determined, P3.3 and P3.4 also degrade into sin-
gle time slot problems. The overall problem will be solved
using the proposed DA-MAB algorithm, as illustrated in
Fig. 4. Whenαj,k(TT0)andβi,j,k(t)are ﬁxed, the values of
WC
i,j(t),WG
i,j(t),fC
i,j(t),fG
i,j(t)will be determined through the
construction of Lagrangian equations and convex optimization.
Then when αj,k(TT0)is ﬁxed,βi,j,k(t)will be determined using
the DA algorithm, while the decision variables αj,k(TT0)will
be determined using the MAB-UCB algorithm.
B. Optimal Workload Allocation Strategy
First, we get the optimal solution of WC
i,j(t)andWG
i,j(t).
Lemma 1: In order to minimize latency and energy consump-
tion, the relationship between workload and working frequency
should be as follows:
WC
i,j(t)
γC
i(t)fC
i,j(t)=WG
i,j(t)
γG
i(t)fG
i,j(t),∀i∈I,j∈J. (34)
The proof is provided in Appendix A, available online.
Lemma 2: To minimize latency and energy consumption, the
workload should satisfy the following relationship:
∂Yi,j
∂WC
i,j(t)=∂Yi,j
∂WG
i,j(t),∀i∈I,j∈J. (35)
The proof is provided in Appendix B, available online.
Based on Lemmas 1and2, the optimal workload allocation
can be obtained as follows:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩WC∗
i,j(t)=/summationtext
kβi,j,k(t)bi,kLCi(t)√
εG
jγC
i(t)
√
εC
jγG
i(t)+√
εG
jγC
i(t),
WG∗
i,j(t)=/summationtext
kβi,j,k(t)bi,kLCi(t)√
εC
jγG
i(t)
√
εC
jγG
i(t)+√
εG
jγC
i(t).(36)
C. The Optimal Working Frequency Allocation Strategy
Next, we will discuss the optimal allocation of working fre-
quencyfC
i,j(t)andfG
i,j(t)in P3.2 + P3.3 + P3.4 according to
Zi,j(t).L e tWC
i(t)=/summationtext
jWC
i,j(t),WG
i(t)=/summationtext
jWG
i,j(t).
Fig. 5. The overall DA-MAB algorithm.
WhenZi,j(t)=0 ,F3.2+F3.3+F3.4=V2μ
T∗DCom
i(t)+
V2(1−μ)εC
j(WC
i(t))3
E∗(γC
i(t)DCom
i(t))2+V2(1−μ)εG
j(WG
i(t))3
E∗(γG
i(t)DCom
i(t))2.L e t∂Yi,j
∂DCom
i(t)=0 to
get
DCom∗
i(t)=3/radicalbig
2Ai(t), (37)
whereAi(t)=(1−μ)T∗
E∗μ(εC
i(WC
i(t))3
(γC
i(t))2+εG
i(WG
i(t))3
(γG
i(t))2).
WhenZi,j(t)/negationslash=0, we can get F3.2+F3.3+F3.4=/summationtext
i/summationtext
jYi,j(fC
i,j(t),fG
i,j(t))−/summationtext
i/summationtext
jGi,j(fC
i,j(t))−/summationtext
i/summationtext
jHi,j(fG
i,j(t)).
Lemma 3: F3.2+F3.3+F3.4only have one set of
{fC
i,j(t),fG
i,j(t)},∀i∈I,j∈J,in deﬁning domains fC
i,j(t)∈
(0,+∞),fG
i,j(t)∈(0,+∞)to take the minimum value of the
function.
The proof is provided in Appendix C, available online.
B a s e do nL e m m a s 1and 2, the optimal computing time
DCom∗
i(t)can be obtained by Cardano formula as follows:
DCom∗
i(t)=3/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtAi(t)+/radicalBigg
(Ai(t))2+/parenleftbiggBi(t)
3/parenrightbigg3
+3/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex/radicalbtAi(t)−/radicalBigg
(Ai(t))2+/parenleftbiggBi(t)
3/parenrightbigg3
,(38)
whereBi(t)=V1Zi,j(t)T∗
V2μ(/summationtext
kvi,kαj,k(TT0)βi,j,k(t))·/summationtext
k
βi,j,k(t)bi,kLCi(t).
According to Lemma 1, it can be concluded that the optional
frequency fC∗
i,j(t)andfG∗
i,j(t)are both as
⎧
⎪⎨
⎪⎩fC∗
i,j(t)=m i n/braceleftBigWC
i,j(t)
γC
i(t)DCom∗
i(t),fC,max
j/bracerightBig
fG∗
i,j(t)=m i n/braceleftBigWG
i,j(t)
γG
i(t)DCom∗
i(t),fG,max
j/bracerightBig. (39)
D. The Optimal Task Ofﬂoading Strategy
For the task ofﬂoading problem βi,j,k(t)at the short timescale,
we utilize the many-to-one matching theory, as illustrated in
Fig.5, to solve the problem in polynomial time. Matching theory
provides an efﬁcient and low-complexity approach to solve
integer problems and has been widely used in various wireless
communication systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 9 ---
3838 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
According to the deﬁnition of matching theory, matching is
an assignment between two sets of players, namely the set of
tasks and the set of computing nodes. Considering the structure
of problem P2, we consider an extended many-to-one matching
model, where each computing node jowns different models and
computing resource, can be assigned to multiple tasks, while
each task ican only be assigned to one model kon a computing
node. The form of the considered many-to-one matching is
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1: The considered many-to-one matching game
consists of two sets of participants, namely IandJ×K .T h e
result of the many-to-one matching pairs is a function ηfrom all
elements of Ito an element of J×K that satisﬁes:
/braceleftbigg
βi,j,k(t)=1,i f(j,k)=η(i),
βi,j,k(t)=0, otherwise.(40)
So P2 can be equivalent to a weighted many-to-one matching
problem. For simplicity, the variable tis removed from the
following equation. The weight between task iand node (j,k)
is given by P2 and the optimal workload allocation and working
frequency allocation strategies
wi,j,k=V2μ
T∗/parenleftbiggdi,jCi
Ri,j+DCom∗
i/parenrightbigg
+V1Zi,j/parenleftbig
bi,kLCi−αj,kTslot/bracketleftbig
γC
ifC
i,j+γG
ifG
i,j/bracketrightbig/parenrightbig
+V2(1−μ)
E∗/parenleftbiggεd
idi,jCi
Ri,j+εC
jWC
i,j/parenleftbig
fC
i,j/parenrightbig2+εG
jWG
i,j/parenleftbig
fG
i,j/parenrightbig2/parenrightbigg
.
(41)
Tasks can select computing nodes based on weights arranged in
ascending order. Since different tasks require different numbers
of CPU and GPU cores, the traditional exchange matching
algorithm can only guarantee stability when tasks have the same
resource requirements. To address this, we extend the one-sided
matching to a two-sided matching. For each task and node, they
establish preference lists for each other and use the Gale-Shapley
(GS) algorithm, also known as the DA algorithm, to ensure stable
matching. The preference list for task iisψi={wi,j,k(t)},
∀j∈J,k∈Kand(j,k)satisfy (20). The preference list for
nodejand model kisψj,k={wi,j,k(t)},∀i∈Iandisatisfy
(20). The process of DA matching is as follows:
1) Application: Each task applies to its top-ranked computing
node in the preference list ψi. Each task can only apply to a
computing node that has never rejected it before.
2) Selection: Each computing node with capacities QC,max
j
andQG,max
j receives a set of applicants φj. Due to shared
computing capacity among models on one node, the preference
listsψj,kof all models kdeployed in the node are merged into
a node preference list ψj. Based on the ψj, each node accepts a
certain number of tasks in ascending order, rejects the remaining
tasks by setting their wi,j,k(t)inφjtowmax
i,j,k(t), wherewmax
i,j,k(t)
is a pre-deﬁned penalty threshold larger than all wvalues. If the
total demand of the applicants is less than QC,max
j andQG,max
j ,
all tasks are accepted.
3) Deferred Acceptance: Rejected tasks continue to apply to
computing nodes until they are accepted by a computing nodeAlgorithm 1: Short Timescale Task Ofﬂoading and Model
Chosen by DA Algorithm.
1: Calculate wi,j,k(t)for alli∈I,j∈Jandk∈K.
2:repeat
3:fori∈Ido
4: Build ψi.
5:end for
6:for(j,k)∈J×K do
7: Sort φjby the weights of ψi.
8: repeat
9: Set η(i)=(j,k)and delete η(i)fromφj.
10: untilφj=∅orQC,max
j is exceeded orQG,max
j is
exceeded.
11: Set wi,j,k(t)=wmax
i,j,k(t)forη(i)inφj.
12: end for
13: until All tasks are accepted or rejected by all nodes.
Output: Transferηto the task ofﬂoading indicator as (39).
or rejected by all computing nodes in their preference list. Then,
each computing node accepts new applicants according to the
rules in step 2).
4) Task Delivery: Determine all tasks accepted by computing
nodejand perform routing for the tasks.
Algorithm 1provides a detailed description of the steps to
solve task ofﬂoading problem using DA matching. The com-
plexity of this algorithm depends on the larger value between the
number of tasks and the number of computing nodes. Consider-
ing that the number of tasks is usually larger than the number of
computing nodes in the considered network, the complexity of
Algorithm 1is on the order of O(I2), increasing quadratically
with the number of tasks.
Given the model placement strategy, all optimization prob-
lems in the single time slot have been resolved.
E. The Optimal Model Placement Strategy
A ss h o w ni nF i g . 5, the placement strategy for the computing
node models at the long timescale can be reduced to a special
case of the MAB problem. In the standard MAB problem, it’s
assumed there are Karms bandit. The decision-maker has V
opportunities to pull the arms, and generates rewards Xvin
turnv. The decision-maker does not possess explicit knowledge
about the quality of each arm kbut relies on past observations
to select a potentially good arm that maximizes the cumulative
rewardX(t).
In our research, after addressing all the problems at the short
timescale, our objective can be transformed into solving P4 as
P4:m i n F4=(T+1)T0−1/summationdisplay
t=TT0/summationdisplay
i/summationdisplay
j(Gi,j(αj,k(TT0))
+Hi,j(αj,k(TT0))
s.t. (1) (42)
Due to the lack of knowledge about the arrival of tasks within the
time interval [TT0,(T+1)T0)at timeTT0, the model selection
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 10 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3839
strategyαj,kcan only be adjusted based on historical informa-
tion within a limited complexity space to maximize long-term
rewards.
First, each node jis considered to have |Kj|arms, where
|Kj|represents the total number of model types deployable on
nodej. In each round, αmax
j arms need to be pulled for each
nodej, which means selecting αmax
jdifferent models from the
set of model types Kj. (If the domain of αj,k(t)is extended,
it means that each arm has a weight αj,k(t), and need to select
models that meet (1)instead of selecting αmax
jdifferent models)
Second, each pull may result in a change in task selections for the
current round, making it a dynamic MAB process. Therefore, we
improve the basic Upper Conﬁdence Bounds (UCB) algorithm
by updating the conﬁdence bounds of the mean reward at each
time slot and selecting the top αmax
j arms with low weights as
the current stage’s model placement strategy at the beginning of
each large time slot.
Assuming that at each slot t∈[TT0,(T+1)T0),Vattempts
are made to randomly change the combination of node models.
Let−
Rj,k(t)=/summationtext(T+1)T0−1
t=TT0−w(t)
vj,k(t)−w∗(t)denote the cumulative
regret for arm (j,k)at timet, where−w(t)represents the average
weight value obtained by selecting arm (j,k)in the attempts
at timet,hj,k(t)is the cumulative number of attempts to
select(j,k)during the time interval [TT0,t], andw∗(t)is the
predeﬁned optimal benchmark utility.
According to the UCB algorithm, the upper boundary of
the conﬁdence interval is set to/radicalBig
2log(V∗(t−TT0))
hj,k(t)+1, whereV∗
(t−TT0)represents the total number of selections at time t.
Therefore, the cumulative regret for arm (j,k)at timetis given
by−
Rj,k(t)−/radicalBig
2log(V∗(t−TT0))
hj,k(t)+1. It can be observed that when
the number of selections hj,k(t)for arm(j,k)is small, the
upper boundary of the conﬁdence interval is relatively large,
resulting in a lower regret and increasing the probability of
selecting that arm for exploration. The probability of exploration
is a normalized probability function of cumulative regret. As the
number of selections increases, the uncertainty decreases, and
the cumulative regret is gradually dominated by−
Rj,k(t).A tt h i s
point, arms with lower cumulative regret will emerge as winners.
Based on this, we obtain
arm(j)=argmink/bracketleftBigg
−
Rj,k(t)−/radicalBigg
2log(V∗(t−TT0))
hj,k(t)+1/bracketrightBigg
.
(43)
At(t+1)T0, select the smallest αmax
j regret arms for each node,
which is the next long timescale (t+1)T0+1Model placement
strategy. The speciﬁc algorithm is as follows:
It can be seen that the complexity of the MAB algorithm is
not only related to the number of attempts V, but also to the
complexity of the DA algorithm used in step 4 of Algorithm 2.
Therefore, in the DA algorithm in step 4, we only perform the
ﬁrst time matching in Algorithm 1and estimate the total weight
to minimize algorithm complexity. So, the complexity of each
execution of the MAB algorithm is O(VT0). At each time slot,
the DA algorithm and the MAB algorithm are both executed,
Fig. 6. The network topology for simulations.
Algorithm 2: Long Time Scale Model Placement Schedul-
ing by Improved MAB-UCB.
1:fort∈[TT0,(T+1)T0]do
2: forv=1:Vdo
3: Select arms as−
Rj,k(t)−/radicalBig
2log(V∗(t−TT0))
hj,k(t)+1.
4: Calculate weight by DA algorithm.
5: Update−
Rj,k(t)=/summationtext(T+1)T0−1
t=TT0−w(t)
hj,k(t)+1−w∗(t).
6: end for
7:end for
8:ift=(T+1)T0then
9: forj=1:Jdo
10: Select αmax
jarms as
arm(j)=argmink/bracketleftbigg−
Rj,k(t)−/radicalBig
2log(V∗(t−TT0))
hj,k(t)+1/bracketrightbigg
.
11: end for
12: end if
and a placement plan is made using the MAB algorithm in ﬁxed
interval time slots. The total complexity of executing DA-MAB
at timet∈[TT0,(T+1)T0]does not exceed O(I2T0+VT0).
V. S IMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. Experimental Settings
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the DA-MAB
algorithm. In the basic scenario, we compare the DA-MAB
algorithm with other algorithms in the Atlanta network topology
with 15 computing nodes, as shown in Fig. 6(a), where the
numbers represent the number of models can be deployed for
each node. In the experiments, a total of 210 tasks are assigned
to 35 users, with task allocation performed every 100 seconds.
We assumed that users’ tasks followed a periodicity of 600
seconds. For the short time slot analysis, we employed three
comparative algorithms: Greedy algorithm, particle swarm op-
timization (PSO) algorithm, and Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) algorithm. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 6(b),w eu s e
the ta2 network consisting of 65 computing nodes and 560 users
to validate the algorithm’s performance on a larger topology,
referred to as DA-MAB (ta2). The distribution probabilities of
tasks and models on this topology are set to be the same as the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 11 ---
3840 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL PARAMETERS
Fig. 7. Overall performance over time.
Atlanta network topology. For the long timescale, commonly
used approaches in the communication ﬁeld involve obtaining
prior knowledge through prediction methods and combining
it with other techniques for comparison. Therefore, we chose
the best-performing PPO algorithm among the aforementioned
benchmark algorithms and compared it with our MAB algo-
rithm under the assumption of prior knowledge. The detailed
experimental settings are shown in Table II.
B. Overall Performance
First, we compared the performance of the algorithms within
each time slot, as shown in Fig. 7. The objective has been
equivalent to minimizing the overall weight. It can be observed
that our DA-MAB algorithm outperforms the three benchmark
algorithms overall, with smaller ﬂuctuations in weight over
time. The DA-MAB algorithm with dynamic model placement
enabled will be more stable over time, the performance of PSO
and PPO and Greedy algorithms is relatively less stable. In
the larger ta2 topology, due to stronger node connectivity, the
average weight is reduced and more stable compared with the
Atlanta network.
C. Analysis of Data Size
Subsequently, we investigated the impact of data size on algo-
rithm performance and optimization results. As shown in Fig. 8,
when the data size is increased threefold, DA-MAB, DA-MAB
(ta2) and Greedy algorithms exhibit steady growth, while the
PSO and PPO algorithms experience signiﬁcant increases. This
is because as the data volume increases, the PSO and PPO
algorithms may encounter penalties due to exceeding the node
capacity limit, which is inherent to their exploratory choice. The
Fig. 8. Single time slot performance with data size varying.
Fig. 9. The probability density distribution of the average task completion.
Fig. 10. Performance over time with transmission rate varying.
DA-MAB (ta2) exhibits the slowest growth rate, enabling it can
support larger data transmission.
Furthermore, the probability density distribution of the av-
erage task completion time for the DA-MAB algorithm under
different data sizes is shown in Fig. 9.F i g . 9(a) and(b)represent
the probability density distribution at time t=0 andt=1,
respectively, where the total data size at t=1 is greater than
that att=0. It can be observed that as the data size increases,
the average task completion time increases, including both trans-
mission time and computation time, and shows a more dispersed
distribution.
D. Analysis of Transmission Rate
Fig. 10presents the variation of weight for different algo-
rithms under different transmission rates. The PSO algorithm’s
performance is weaker than the other three algorithms and is not
shown in the ﬁgure. Fig. 10(a) illustrates the average weight of
rasks for the Greedy algorithm with single time slot optimization
across six time slots under different transmission rates. The
algorithm performs relatively stable when the transmission rate
is high but shows poor performance when the transmission rate
is low. This is because at low transmission rates, tasks are more
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 12 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3841
Fig. 11. The probability density distribution of CPU and GPU frequencies with energy coefﬁcient varying.
sensitive to the selection of computing nodes in order to ensure
task completion latency. Therefore, the gap between the local
optimal solution obtained by the greedy strategy and the global
optimal solution becomes larger. Fig. 10(b) shows the average
weight of tasks for the PPO algorithm with single time slot opti-
mization. The PPO algorithm exhibits stable performance under
various transmission rates, outperforming the Greedy algorithm
but slightly inferior to the DA-MAB algorithm. Fig. 10(c)
and (d)includes the multi time slot optimization MAB-UCB
algorithm, where the MAB algorithm is executed at t=3.I t
can be observed that after t=3, the performance of DA-MAB
is signiﬁcantly better than the other benchmark algorithms both
in small and large network, and the algorithm’s performance
remains stable under different transmission rates.
E. Analysis of Computing Frequency
Fig. 11illustrates the impact of the energy coefﬁcient on
the optimal selection of CPU and GPU operating frequencies.
By changing the energy coefﬁcient of the CPU, the probability
density distribution of the CPU and GPU operating frequencies
on the same computing node will change. When the CPU energy
coefﬁcient decreases, the range of optimal operating frequencies
expands, and tasks tend to use higher-frequency CPUs and
lower-frequency GPUs. However, the relationship between the
two is not linear. When the CPU energy coefﬁcient is lower than
that of the GPU, the strategy that optimizes energy consumption
and latency comprehensively results in a higher average CPU
operating frequency than the average GPU operating frequency.
Additionally, the results when changing the GPU energy coefﬁ-
cient are similar to Fig. 11and are not repeated here.
Fig. 12illustrates the impact of the frequency upper limit on
weight, time and energy. Due to different topological connectiv-
ity, the time for comparison only includes computation time. In
both network topologies, the weight initially increases and then
decreases with the frequency upper limit increasing, while the
average computing time gradually decreases and the average en-
ergy consumption gradually increases, ultimately stabilizing. It
implies that in networks with lower computing power, users take
Fig. 12. Performance over time with frequency upper limit.
Fig. 13. Performance over time with short communication interval.
longer to complete tasks but consume less energy. In networks
with sufﬁcient computing power, users experience stable average
energy consumption while achieving shorter computation times.
F . Analysis of Communication Interval
Then, Figs. 13and 14illustrate the impact of shortening
the communication interval on the system. The comparison
among the three algorithms when T =20s is shown in Fig. 13.
Similarly, we enabled the MAB algorithm at t=3, dynamically
optimizing the model placement strategy on computing nodes
and obtaining better and more stable results in subsequent time
slots. Comparing with Fig. 7, it can be observed that when the
communication interval is shorter, both the average completion
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 13 ---
3842 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 17, NO. 6, NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2024
Fig. 14. Average queue length between short and standard communication
interval.
Fig. 15. Performance of MAB algorithm compared with multi time slots PPO.
time and energy consumption of the system are higher than the
standard interval. Fig. 14shows the variation of average queue
length for tasks over time under two communication interval
conditions. The average queue length for tasks is higher when the
communication interval is shorter. Due to the utilization of Lya-
punov optimization, which converts the queue stability condition
into the optimization objective, the difference in queue length at
most time slots is not signiﬁcant under different communication
interval conditions.
G. Analysis of MAB Algorithm
Finally, we discussed the applicability of the MAB algorithm
in large-scale model placement strategies. We chose the multi
time slots PPO algorithm as the benchmark algorithm, which
optimizes model placement based on known information about
task workloads at multiple time slots. In Fig. 15(a) –(d),t h e
impact of different numbers of attempts in the MAB algorithm
and its comparison with the multi time slots PPO algorithm is
shown on the effectiveness of each time slot. Fig. 15(a) shows
the average weight of tasks in the three time slots after the
model placement strategy is updated. It can be seen that the
average weight decreases as the number of attempts increases.
When trying 30 times in each time slot, the average weight
is already close to that of the PPO algorithm. Fig. 15(b) –(d)
compare the optimized weights for the three time slots and theiraverages. Due to prior global optimization, PPO has more evenly
distributed weights in each time slot. However, since the MAB
algorithm lacks prior knowledge, its performance in a single
time slot may be inferior or superior to the PPO algorithm.
Combining with Fig. 15(e) , as the number of attempts per round
increases, the probability of being penalized for exceeding node
capacity gradually decreases for the MAB algorithm, and there
are almost no cases of exceeding node capacity when trying
30 times per round. From this, we can conclude that the MAB
algorithm, as the number of attempts increases, reduces weight
by selecting stable strategies based on accumulated experience
and may achieve better strategies than the prior PPO algorithm
within a single time slot.
In addition, it should be noted that although the MAB al-
gorithm provides a distributed model placement strategy, the
employed DA algorithm is implemented in a centralized man-
ager to achieve low-complexity strategy updates. We are going
to improve task ofﬂoading strategy to achieve a fully distributed,
low-complexity, and efﬁcient solution in the future work.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we construct an AIaaS-based computing power
network resource allocation framework, which enables dynamic
model placement, computing power allocation and task ofﬂoad-
ing strategies. The long-term problem of minimizing overall
network latency and energy consumption is transformed into
short-term problems by Lyapunov optimization. We employ an
improved deferred-acceptance algorithm, convex optimization,
and a multi-armed bandits algorithm to achieve low-complexity
online optimization. Finally, extensive experiments are con-
ducted to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms
compared to existing approaches. In the future work, we con-
sider developing the testbed for the proposed framework and
validating the algorithm in the real world.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Tang et al., “Computing power network: The architecture of conver-
gence of computing and networking towards 6G requirement,” China
Commun. , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 175–185, 2021.
[2] Recommendation I, “Framework and overall objectives of the future
development of IMT for 2030 and beyond,” Int. Telecommun. Union (ITU)
Recommend. (ITU-R) , 2023.
[3] E. Peltonen et al., “6G white paper on edge intelligence,” 2020, arXiv:
2004.14850 .
[4] D. Xu et al., “Edge intelligence: Empowering intelligence to the edge of
network,” in Proc. IEEE , vol. 109, no. 11, pp. 1778–1837, Nov. 2021.
[5] W. Zhang, S. Zeadally, W. Li, H. Zhang, J. Hou, and V . C. M. Leung,
“Edge AI as a service: Conﬁgurable model deployment and delay-energy
optimization with result quality constraints,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. ,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1954–1969, Second Quarter, 2023.
[6] M. Latva-Aho and K. Leppänen, “Key drivers and research challenges
for 6G ubiquitous wireless intelligence,” Univ. Oulu, While Paper, Oulu,
Finland, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://urn.ﬁ/urn:isbn:9789526223544
[7] H. Geng, D. Zeng, and Y . Li, “Performance efﬁcient layer-aware DNN
inference task scheduling in GPU cluster,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun.
Conf. , 2022, pp. 2242–2247.
[8] T. X. Tran and D. Pompili, “Joint task ofﬂoading and resource allocation
for multi-server mobile-edge computing networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol. , vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 856–868, Jan. 2019.
[9] B. Costa et al., “Orchestration in fog computing: A comprehensive survey,”
ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 1–34, 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 14 ---
CHAI et al.: JOINT TASK OFFLOADING, RESOURCE ALLOCATION AND MODEL PLACEMENT FOR AI AS A SERVICE IN 6G NETWORK 3843
[10] H. Kokkonen, S. Pirttikangas, and L. Lovén, “EISim: A platform for sim-
ulating intelligent edge orchestration solutions,” 2023, arXiv:2311.01224 .
[11] H. Kokkonen et al., “Autonomy and intelligence in the computing con-
tinuum: Challenges, enablers, and future directions for orchestration,”
2022, arXiv:2205.01423 .
[12] J. Li et al., “AIQoSer: Building the efﬁcient inference-QoS for AI ser-
vices,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 30th Int. Symp. Qual. Service , 2022, pp. 1–10.
[13] B. Da and M. Carugi, “Representative use cases and key network require-
ments for network 2030,” Tech. Rep. ITU-T FG-NET2030, 2020.
[14] E. Peltonen et al., “The many faces of edge intelligence,” IEEE Access ,
vol. 10, pp. 104769–104782, 2022.
[15] M. Chen and Y . Hao, “Task ofﬂoading for mobile edge computing in
software deﬁned ultra-dense network,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. ,
vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 587–597, Mar. 2018.
[16] S. Deng, H. Zhao, W. Fang, J. Yin, S. Dustdar, and A. Y . Zomaya, “Edge
intelligence: The conﬂuence of edge computing and artiﬁcial intelligence,”
IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7457–7469, Aug. 2020.
[17] A. Bhuiyan, D. Liu, A. Khan, A. Saifullah, N. Guan, and Z. Guo, “Energy-
efﬁcient parallel real-time scheduling on clustered multi-core,” IEEE
Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. , vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 2097–2111, Sep. 2020.
[18] Q. Zeng, Y . Du, K. Huang, and K. K. Leung, “Energy-efﬁcient resource
management for federated edge learning with CPU-GPU heterogeneous
computing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 7947–
7962, Dec. 2021.
[19] J. Feng, W. Zhang, Q. Pei, J. Wu, and X. Lin, “Heterogeneous computation
and resource allocation for wireless powered federated edge learning
systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 3220–3233, May 2022.
[20] K. Cao, Y . Cui, L. Li, J. Zhou, and S. Hu, “CPU-GPU cooperative QoS
optimization of personalized digital healthcare using machine learning
and swarm intelligence,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinf. , vol. 21,
no. 4, pp. 521–533, Jul./Aug. 2024.
[21] Z. Zhang, Q. Li, L. Lu, D. Guo, and Y . Zhang, “Joint optimization of
the partition and scheduling of DNN tasks in computing and network
convergence,” IEEE Netw. Lett. , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 130–134, Jun. 2023.
[22] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “SplitPlace: AI augmented splitting
and placement of large-scale neural networks in mobile edge environ-
ments,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. , vol. 22, no. 9, pp. 5539–5554,
Sep. 2023.
[23] T. Lähderanta et al., “Edge computing server placement with capacitated
location allocation,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. , vol. 153, pp. 130–149,
2021.
[24] X. Wei, A. B. M. M. Rahman, D. Cheng, and Y . Wang, “Joint optimiza-
tion across timescales: Resource placement and task dispatching in edge
clouds,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. , vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 730–744, First
Quarter, 2023.
[25] Y . He et al., “Two-timescale resource allocation for automated networks
in IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 7881–7896,
Oct. 2022.
[26] Y . Sun, S. Chen, Z. Wang, and S. Mao, “A joint learning and game-theoretic
approach to multi-dimensional resource management in fog radio access
networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 2550–2563,
Feb. 2023.
[27] W. Fan et al., “DNN deployment, task ofﬂoading, and resource allocation
for joint task inference in IIoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 1634–1646, Feb. 2023.
[28] M. V olk et al., “Facing big data system architecture deployments: Towards
an automated approach using container technologies for rapid prototyp-
ing,” in Proc. 55th Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. , 2022, pp. 6125–6134.
[29] M. J. Neely, “Stochastic network optimization with application to commu-
nication and queueing systems,” Synth. Lectures Commun. Netw. ,v o l .3 ,
no. 1, pp. 1–211, 2010.
Yuhao Chai received the BE degree from the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Bei-
jing, China, where he is currently working toward the
PhD degree with the School of Electronic Engineer-
ing. His research interests include 6G network, game
theory, machine learning and network intelligence.
Kaice Gao received the BE degree from the Beijing
University of Posts and Telecommunications, Bei-
jing, China, where he is currently working toward the
MS degree with the School of Electronic Engineering.
His research interests include computing power net-
work, distributed training and reinforcement learning.
Guohan Zhang received the PhD degree in manage-
ment mathematics from the University of Birming-
ham, United Kingdom, in 2017. He is currently an
assistant professor with the Department of Mathe-
matics, the School of Science, BUPT, Beijing China
and Key Laboratory of Mathematics and Information
Networks (Beijing University of Posts and Telecom-
munications), Ministry of Education, China. His re-
search interests include mathematical optimization,
image processing and machine learning.
Lu Lu (Member, IEEE) received the master’s degree
from the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommu-
nications, Beijing, China, in 2005. She is the deputy
director with the Department of Basic Network Tech-
nology, China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing, the
leader of Core Network Group of CCSA TC5, and the
vice-chairman of ITU-T SG13. Her main research
direction covers 5G/6G architecture and computing
power network.
Qin Li received the master’s degree from Chongqing
University, Chongqing, China, in 2002. She is a se-
nior researcher with China Mobile Research Institute,
Beijing, China, and has engaged in technical and
application research on core network and content
network for more than 20 years. Her research interests
cover 5G/6G architecture, network intelligence and
digital twin network.
Yong Zhang received the PhD degree from the Bei-
jing University of Posts and Telecommunications
(BUPT), Beijing, China, in 2007. He is a professor
with the School of Electronic Engineering, BUPT.
He is currently the director of Fab.X Artiﬁcial Intelli-
gence Research Center, BUPT. He is the deputy head
of the mobile internet service and platform working
group, China communications standards association.
He has authored or coauthored more than 80 papers
and holds 30 granted China patents. His research
interests include artiﬁcial intelligence, wireless com-
munication, and Internet of Things.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Downloaded on March 26,2026 at 09:09:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

