=== GSTC(MMC)_1.23.pdf ===
总页数: 16

--- Page 1 ---
1
Zero-Cost Proxy NAS-Driven Collaborative
Deployment Optimization for the Full Lifecycle of
AI Services
Kai Peng, Yue Y ang, Jing Lu, Xinyi Y ang, Yi Hu, and Menglan Hu
Abstract—With the widespread deployment of artificial intelligence (AI), neural architecture search (NAS) reduces the human cost
of model design. Zero-cost proxies further speed up selection, while microservice-based AI services enhance deployment flexibility.
However, existing frameworks still face three challenges. NAS design is disconnected from practical deployment, existing proxies focus
on general metrics instead of deployment needs, and models lack adaptability to dynamic scenarios. These issues waste resources
and increase latency, limiting deployment efficiency. To address these problems, we propose a zero-cost proxy-driven framework for
full-lifecycle joint optimization of neural architectures. By using information-quantity quantization encoding, we build the GSTC zero-
cost proxy model to evaluate both architecture performance and deployment requirements without any training. Based on the M/M/C
queueing model, we design the JCQDA algorithm and the LAMRA algorithm. They bridge the gap between architecture design and
deployment, and enable load-aware dynamic model replacement, respectively. Together, they form an end-to-end optimization pipeline.
This framework effectively resolves the above issues. It improves resource utilization and service quality, while reducing latency and the
duality gap. It provides an efficient solution for full-lifecycle optimization of AI services. Finally, we rigorously prove the model performance
through theoretical analysis and experiments.
Index Terms—neural architecture search, zero-cost proxy, AI service, full-lifecycle optimization, dynamic deployment
✦
1 INTRODUCTION
WITHthe rapid development of artificial intelligence
(AI) technologies, AI services [1], [2] have been
widely deployed in intelligent manufacturing [3], [4], smart
healthcare [5], [6], and autonomous driving [7], [8], becom-
ing a key driver of industrial upgrading. The traditional
“Software as a Service” (SaaS) model focuses on delivering
standardized functions. It is difficult for this model to meet
the rigid requirements of modern applications for person-
alized performance optimization, low-latency response, and
dynamic resource scheduling. The large-scale deployment
of AI services urgently requires a shift in the technical
paradigm from “standardized software delivery” to “full
lifecycle collaborative optimization.”
Modern AI service’s microservice architecture links per-
formance tightly to neural architecture, deployment, and
routing, making siloed optimizations ineffective. A loosely
coupled microservice architecture [9], [10] splits complex
functions into modules that collaborate on tasks such as
object detection and semantic understanding, improving
scalability, maintainability, and customizability, but com-
plicating deployment and resource management. Unlike
traditional microservices [11], [12], AI service performance
is tightly coupled with neural network architecture design
[13], service deployment strategy [14], and request routing
mechanism [15]. Specifically, the architecture design sets the
baseline of performance and computational cost, deploy-
•Corresponding author: Menglan Hu.
•K. Peng, Y. Yang, J. Lu, X. Yang, Y. Hu, and M. Hu are with Hubei Key
Laboratory of Smart Internet Technology, School of Electronic Information
and Communication, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China, 430074. E-mail:{pkhust, d202581406, lujing011621,
xinyiyang, hust huyi, humenglan}@hust.edu.cn.ment strategy affects resource utilization and communica-
tion overhead, and routing strategy determines response
latency. Taking an end-to-end AI quality inspection service
in a smart factory as an example, its chained stages in-
clude data preprocessing [16], object classification [17], and
semantic segmentation [18]. These stages must satisfy the
low-latency and high-reliability requirements in industrial
scenarios. Yet, traditional solutions ignore edge computing
power in architecture design, distribute dependent services
in deployment strategy, and handle dynamic workloads
only by scaling out instances. These problems lead to de-
layed inspection responses and wasted resources. These is-
sues highlight an urgent need for full lifecycle collaborative
optimization of AI services. Existing related studies have
recognized the importance, achieving in aspects such as au-
tomation of architecture design and the resource allocation
efficiency of deployment strategies [19]. During industrial
deployment of AI models, the performance is effectively
improved and deployment energy consumption is reduced.
Nevertheless, full lifecycle management of AI services
still exists key problems, including “design-deployment dis-
connection” and insufficient dynamic collaboration, which
seriously limit system effectiveness. On one hand, neural
architecture search (NAS) [13], [20] enables automated de-
sign of high-performance models. However, most methods
optimize accuracy and efficiency in isolation, neglecting
practical deployment constraints such as available comput-
ing power and network topology. As a result, NAS-designed
architectures may underperform on edge nodes [1] and
in cloud data centers [2], and may even waste resources.
On the other hand, research on AI service deployment
and routing mainly focuses on resource allocation and traf-

--- Page 2 ---
2
fic scheduling, with NAS architecture optimization rarely
incorporated into deployment decisions. Instead, require-
ments are met only by scaling instances or adjusting paths,
making it difficult to fundamentally improve the fit between
services and resources. Meanwhile, dynamic collaboration
between deployment and architecture remains limited. Most
current approaches only have adjusted containers or virtual
machines at runtime. They lack mechanisms for dynamic
optimization and replacement at the architecture level,
breaking the collaborative link from architecture design to
dynamic deployment execution. Together, these problems
limit the effectiveness of AI service lifecycle management.
The root causes are that architecture evaluation is sepa-
rated from deployment constraints, design strategies lack
dynamic adaptation, and resource collaboration has broken
links.
To achieve the collaborative objective of “zero-cost
evaluation, static deployment, and dynamic adjustment,”
current research needs to overcome three core challenges:
architecture evaluation, feature integration, and dynamic
collaboration. First, there is a lack of efficient architecture
evaluation tools aligned with deployment needs. Traditional
NAS [21] is computationally expensive and difficult to in-
terpret. Existing zero-cost proxies rely on general metrics
such as gradients [22], [23] and complexity [24], which
poorly capture deployment-oriented architecture features,
so resource constraints are difficult to incorporate during
the design stage. Second, the architecture features selected
by zero-cost proxies need to be deeply integrated with
deployment strategies. Conflicting objectives like accuracy,
inference speed, and resource consumption, must be con-
sidered together. Latency also needs to be decomposed at
a fine-grained level through the M/M/C queuing model.
In addition, deployment needs must be balanced between
centralized deployment and same-node deployment. This
requires resolving variable coupling in multi-objective opti-
mization. Finally, in dynamic scenarios, workload changes
must be sensed in real time, and both architectures and
deployment plans should be updated jointly. This avoids
delayed responses that can cause excessive latency or re-
source waste. These challenges cover the full process from
architecture design to dynamic operation. They also provide
a clear problem focus for the targeted solutions proposed in
this paper.
To address these challenges, this paper proposes a joint
optimization model that integrates zero-cost proxy NAS
with deployment and routing. This is the first work to
realize collaborative optimization over the full lifecycle,
including architecture design, deployment routing, and dy-
namic adjustment. Our main contributions are as follows:
1) We propose GSTC, a zero-cost proxy model based
on information-quantity quantization encoding that
goes beyond traditional proxies relying on generic
metrics. GSTC is the first to exploit both the di-
minishing nature of information propagation in
neural networks and operation-level differences in
information utilization to guide encoding design. It
considers four dimensions: total path information
(G), path information variation (S), total information
at output nodes (T), and information variation atoutput nodes (C). By capturing structural and task
features, GSTC can evaluate performance without
training. It greatly reduces training cost and sup-
ports customized design, providing a deployment-
aware architectural foundation for optimization.
2) We propose the Joint Communication and Queue-
Aware Deployment Algorithm (JCQDA), which
tightly couples architectures selected by the zero-
cost proxy with deployment decisions, bridging
architecture design and deployment optimization.
JCQDA uses an M/M/C queuing model to char-
acterize communication, queuing, and processing
delays at a fine-grained level. It further introduces
a service-server affinity mechanism to balance con-
solidating instances of the same service (reducing
queuing delay) and co-locating dependent services
(reducing communication delay). This establishes a
design–deployment loop, where architectural char-
acteristics guide deployment and deployment feed-
back validates architectural adaptability, improving
the efficiency of AI service systems.
3) To improve robustness under dynamic workloads,
we design the Load-Aware Model Replacement Al-
gorithm (LAMRA). Together with GSTC and JC-
QDA, LAMRA forms an end-to-end pipeline of
“zero-cost evaluation, static deployment, and dy-
namic adjustment.” It monitors load fluctuations
in real time, selects suitable architectures from the
GSTC-pre-evaluated library, and synchronously up-
dates JCQDA-based deployment plans, coordinat-
ing architecture replacement with deployment ad-
justment. This enables full-lifecycle collaboration
under complex and varying production workloads.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 introduces the
problem formulation. The algorithm design is presented in
Section 4. In Section 5, we provide a theoretical analysis
of the proposed new optimization framework. Section 6
evaluates the performance of the algorithm, and Section 7
concludes the paper.
2 RELATEDWORK
2.1 Zero-Cost NAS Proxy
In AI service deployment, zero-cost proxy models are
crucial for aligning model design with system resources,
but existing proxies are often decoupled from deployment
requirements and thus fail to support full-lifecycle opti-
mization. Activation-based proxies [24], [25], relying on
properties of activation functions, fail to adapt to multi-task
scenarios such as medical image segmentation and indus-
trial defect detection. Gradient-based proxies [22], [26], [27]
require many forward and backward propagations, which
incur high computational cost and limit responsiveness in
dynamic environments. Complexity-based proxies [23] use
FLOPs and parameter counts but ignore network structure,
making it difficult to distinguish heterogeneous architec-
tures with similar complexity. To overcome these limita-
tions, we propose GSTC for deployment-adaptive architec-
ture evaluation. This model is independent of specific acti-

--- Page 3 ---
3
vation functions and quantifies information-transmission ef-
ficiency of network operations, enabling unified evaluation
across multi-task, hybrid deployment scenarios. Operating
directly on network topology without expensive computa-
tion, GSTC evaluates each architecture faster than gradient-
based proxies, supporting timely deployment adjustment
and shifting the focus from general architecture evaluation
to deployment-oriented, real-time model selection.
2.2 AI Service Deployment
In AI service deployment, prior work has rarely in-
tegrated neural network architecture design with deploy-
ment planning. Most studies optimize only deployment or
runtime in isolation. For instance, Hu et al. [1] improved
system performance via DNN deployment and bandwidth
allocation based on human-like network architectures. Zhou
et al. [2] focused on task offloading for generative AI in
6G edge-cloud settings. Chai et al. [28] jointly optimized
task offloading, resource allocation, and model placement.
However, none of these adopted NAS, so architectures
cannot be adapted to deployment resource constraints at the
design stage, while deployment efficiency and adaptabil-
ity remain limited. Additionally, other research considers
architecture-related optimization but still lacks a closed-loop
collaborative mechanism or strong dynamic adaptation. For
example, Lu et al. [29] investigated edge-cloud collaborative
adaptive NAS, while Lyu et al. [30] implemented multi-
objective NAS for resource-constrained edge devices. Niu
et al. [31] proposed ChainNet for loss-aware optimization
only in the edge deployment phase without model-level
dynamic replacement. Similarly, Sedghani et al. [32] opti-
mized resource selection and component deployment only
at design time. To fill these gaps, we construct a collabo-
rative framework that integrates architecture design with
deployment planning. GSTC evaluates architecture perfor-
mance and reduces evaluation costs at the design phase.
On this basis, JCQDA uses the M/M/C queuing model to
characterize communication, queuing, and processing delay
and derive a deployment strategy that minimizes end-to-
end latency, thereby bridging the long-standing separation
between NAS and deployment requirements.
2.3 Dynamic Service Deployment
In dynamic service deployment, current research still
suffers from single-dimensional adjustment, disconnect
from AI service design, and lack of full-lifecycle coordi-
nation, making it unsuitable for complex load fluctuations.
Specifically, studies [9], [33], [34] all neglected model archi-
tecture optimization: Sami et al. [33] enabled on-demand fog
cluster formation and real-time containerized deployment
on volunteer devices but only adjusted container placement,
with the level of dynamism dependent on available device
resources. Wu et al. [9] merely modified container types and
load ratios with a predefined DNN library. Tortonesi et al.
[34] focused only on virtual machine resource scheduling,
resulting in a narrow optimization objective. Conversely,
studies [35], [36], [37] lacked dynamic model replacement.
[35], [36] only adjusted service deployment or offloading via
reinforcement learning or prediction, failing to adapt model
architectures to load. Ji et al. [37] obtained edge resourcesTABLE 1: Notation and Terminology
Notation Definition
pNumber of edges in the current path
sDistance between the starting node and the input node
Xi Quantized operation encoding at nodei
qTotal number of paths in the current architecture
nNumber of edges in the theoretically longest single path
VSet of all serversv∈V
ESet of network links between two servers
CCPUInitial number of CPU cores in a server
CGPUInitial amount of GPU memory in a server
MSet of all AI servicesm∈M
CGPU
MSet of GPU memory requirements of each AI service
RSet of all user service requestsr∈R
Mr Set of AI services included in requestr
λr Arrival rate of requestr
Nv
m Instances of AI servicemon serverv
xr
m Binary variable for AI servicembelonging toM r
λm Overall arrival rate of AI servicem
Pv
m Routing probability of AI servicemto serverv
λv
m Arrival rate of AI servicemon serverv
Tr Service latency of request chainr
TAvg Average end-to-end latency of all requests
via an auction mechanism but still deployed only existing
models. Therefore, we design the LAMRA dynamic model
replacement algorithm and close the loop with the JCQDA
static deployment scheme. LAMRA continuously monitors
load changes, combines GSTC pre-screened architectures
with model parameter counts and inference rates, and se-
lects models for replacement via Pareto frontier analysis.
Meanwhile, JCQDA provides a stable static deployment
foundation for dynamic replacement. Together with GSTC,
these components build a lifecycle optimization chain that
coordinates architecture design and deployment execution
under dynamic loads, which fills the gap in architecture-
deployment co-design and load-aware adaptation.
3 MODELS
The full-lifecycle collaborative optimization framework
for AI services (Fig. 1) has three layers. The user access layer
receives requests from AI applications in various intelligent
scenarios and forwards them to the computing layer via
wireless communication. The computing layer consists of
a server cluster, where each server independently executes
the JCQDA deployment strategy and the LAMRA dynamic
model replacement algorithm. The model design layer uses
the GSTC zero-cost proxy to construct AI models that meet
service requirements. Simultaneously, it receives real-time
feedback from the user access layer to further adjust model
architectures. The updated models are then delivered to the
computing layer to refine deployment strategies, enabling
better adaptation to environmental changes and more flexi-
ble, efficient AI services. Table 1 lists the notations and terms
used in this paper.

--- Page 4 ---
4
in 3*3 MP 3*3 out1*1
MP2x2y2z
in
 3*3
 MP
 3*3
 out
1*1
MP
2x
2y
2zin 1*1 MP 3*3 out
 in
 1*1
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
in 1*1 MP 3*3 out
 in
 1*1
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
in 3*3 MP 3*3 out
 in
 3*3
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
in 3*3 MP 3*3 out
 in
 3*3
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
3*3 MP out
 3*3
 MP
 out2n-12n-2
3*3 MP out
 3*3
 MP
 out2n-12n-2
1*1 out
 1*1
 out2n-1
1*1 out
 1*1
 out2n-1
g2inM
P
M
P
g1
g3
g4
GG:the total architecture 
information quantityMultiply by  2n
Multiply by  2n-1
Multiply by  2n-2
Multiply by  2n-3
|g1-g2|...|g2-g4||g3-g4|S:the path information 
difference quantity
S
T:the total information   
          received by the output node
|t1-t2|...|t2-t4||t3-t4|
C    C:the information difference                     
received by the output nodeArchitecture 1 
Architecture 2 
Architecture R                       
...GSTC Model
Score=a· G+b· S+p· T+q· Cproxy score 1
proxy score 2
proxy score R
...
Ranked by 
proxy scorepolicy network  training 
Architecture M
............
Rproxy score M
true accuracy M[x  y  z  a  b  p  q]
o
ut
inM
Po
ut
M
Po
ut
o
ut
t1
t3
t2
t4
 To
ut
inM
Po
ut
M
Po
ut
o
ut
t1
t3
t2
t4
 Tg4 g3g1 g2
t1 t2
t3 t4Differential training based on 
ranking correlation
V1
V2
V3
 V4
V5
V6f1f2
f3Basic  Microservice tasks
OObject Classification
CScene Classification
R Room Layou t
J Jigsaw Puzzle
S Semantic 
Segmentation
A  Autoencoding
N  Surface NormalBasic  Microservice tasks
OObject Classification
CScene Classification
R Room Layou t
J Jigsaw Puzzle
S Semantic 
Segmentation
A  Autoencoding
N  Surface Normal
O
O
O
J
J
O
O
O
J
J
C
C
C
C
 C
C
C
C
R
R
R
 R
R
R
A
A
A
A
S
N
S
S
S
N
S
N
S
S
S
N
Scene Understandin g 3D Reconstruction  Image Enhancement and Analysis Autonomous Driving Intelligent Quality Inspection
outliers
outliers
θF
θF
θF
J
J
J
J
J
J
 J
J
J
Optimal architecture 
for server applications
Physical  Server
Server Core (idle)
Server Core (occupancy)
Communication Path
Service Chain
O
OPhysical  Server
Server Core (idle)
Server Core (occupancy)
Communication Path
Service Chain
O
f1 Scene Understandin g
 C
C
 R
R
 S
S
 O
O f1 Scene Understandin g
 C
 R
 S
 O
f2 3D Reconstruction
 O
O
 N
N
 R
R
 A
A f2 3D Reconstruction
 O
 N
 R
 A
f3  Image Enhancement and Analysis
 A
A
 J
J
 C
C
 S
S f3  Image Enhancement and Analysis
 A
 J
 C
 S
Application scenariosDynamic 
feedback
User Access LayerComputing LayerModel Design Layer
Fig. 1: Overall framework of the collaborative optimization model for the full lifecycle of AI services.
3.1 Deployment-Aware Zero-Cost Proxy Design
Traditional NAS fully trains candidate models, incur-
ring high computational cost and long search time, which
increase deployment cost and reduce efficiency. Most exist-
ing zero-cost proxies overlook differences in network struc-
tures and tasks, making it hard to align model deployment
with resource constraints. To address this, we develop a
zero-cost proxy by quantifying architectural features and
integrating information propagation characteristics. This ap-
proach provides a basis for efficient and low-cost deploy-
ment of AI services.
3.1.1 Quantized Encoding
Here we take architectures from the NASBench101 [38]
dataset as an example. First, we decompose each architec-
ture into paths. For each branch node, including the input
node, we take the output node as the endpoint and select
the longest path starting from the current node, as shown
in Fig. 2. Previous work shows that effective information
propagation decays with increasing network depth [39],
[40]. Building on this, we further assume that effective infor-
mation decreases exponentially as network depth increases.
Based on this assumption, we encode the information flow
of the architecture.
After quantizing connections, we also quantize opera-
tions to form a unified encoding framework. In terms of the
information usage amount, usage frequency, and retained
amount, the following assumptions are made regarding
information utilization rates of different operations:The amount of information used: each3×3convolution
and3×3pooling operation uses 9 variables per calculation,
while each1×1convolution uses 1 variable;
The frequency of information used: when the stride is
1, each variable is used 9 times in a3×3convolution or
3×3pooling, but only once in a1×1convolution;
The amount of information retained: a3×3convolution
can retain part of the information from all 9 variables,
while a3×3pooling retains only the information of the
maximum variable, and a1×1convolution retains part of
the information from the current variable.
From the above assumptions, the information utiliza-
tion of operations is ranked as3×3convolution>3×3
pooling>1×1convolution. To maximize their separability
and stay consistent with the path-connection encoding, we
also encode operations using the exponential decay scheme.
The encoding values lie inh
2n−1,2−(n−1)i
, and are uni-
formly spaced within this interval to enlarge differences.
The input and output nodes do not process information and
are therefore encoded as 1, as shown in Fig. 2b.
It is important to note that due to the black-box nature
of neural networks, this encoding is not a strict quantitative
measure in the information-theoretic sense, but a hypothesis
built on existing conclusions, designed to emphasize dif-
ferences in information transmission and utilization across
connections and operations.
3.1.2 GSTC Model Design
We construct a new proxy model based on quantitative
encoding. For more comprehensive architecture evaluation,
we define four variables: total path information (G), path

--- Page 5 ---
5
in 3*3 MP 3*3 out1*1
MP2x2y2z
in
 3*3
 MP
 3*3
 out
1*1
MP
2x
2y
2z
(a) CNN cell structure
in 1*1 MP 3*3 out
 in
 1*1
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
in 1*1 MP 3*3 out
 in
 1*1
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
in 3*3 MP 3*3 out
 in
 3*3
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
in 3*3 MP 3*3 out
 in
 3*3
 MP
 3*3
 out2n2n-12n-22n-3
3*3 MP out
 3*3
 MP
 out2n-12n-2
3*3 MP out
 3*3
 MP
 out2n-12n-2
1*1 out
 1*1
 out2n-1
1*1 out
 1*1
 out2n-1 (b) Quantized path encoding
Fig. 2: Quantized operation encoding.
information variation (S), total information at output nodes
(T), and information variation at output nodes (C). Their
values are given by Eq. 1, Eq. 3, Eq. 4, and Eq. 6, respectively.
In these equations,pdenotes the number of edges in the
current path,srepresents the distance from the starting
node of the current path to the input node of the archi-
tecture,X iindicates the quantized encoding value of the
operation at thei-th node in the path,qexpresses the total
number of paths in the architecture, andnis the number
of edges in the theoretically longest single path within the
given constraints.
Total path information (G) can be calculated by Eq. 1.
G=qX
l=1gl (1)
g=p−1X
i=0Xi·2n−s−i(2)
Path information variation (S) is given by Eq. 3.
S=1
(q−1)!X
u∈[1,q]
v∈[1,q]|gu−gv|(3)
Total information at output nodes (T) is shown in Eq. 4.
T=qX
l=1tl (4)
t=X p·2n−p+1(5)
Information variation at output node (C) is Eq. 6.
C=1
2X
u∈[1,q]
v∈[1,q]|tu−tv|(6)
Finally, we take total path information (G) as the ref-
erence. Using min-max feature scaling, the path-related
variables and the output-node-related variables are normal-
ized separately. We then sum the four variables to obtain
the zero-cost proxy model GSTC based on the proposed
information-quantity quantization encoding, as in Eq. 7.
GSTC=G+S+Gmax−G min
Tmax−Tmin·T+Gmax−G min
Cmax−C min·C(7)
3.1.3 General Evaluation Metrics
The standard formulas for calculating the number of
parameters in a CNN model are summarized as follows:The number of parameters in a convolutional layer
Params convis given by Eq. 8:
Params conv= (K w×K h×C in+ 1)×C out (8)
whereK wis the kernel width,K his the kernel height,C in
is the number of input channels, andC outis the number of
output channels. The term “+1” indicates a bias parameter
for each kernel. If the model has no bias, this term is 0.
The amount of parameters in a fully connected layer
Params fccan be calculated using Eq. 9:
Params fc=M×N+N(9)
whereMis the number of input neurons, andNis the
number of output neurons. The finalNdenotes the number
of bias terms. If the model has no bias, this term is set to 0.
The number of parameters in a batch normalization
layer Params bncan be calculated by Eq. 10:
Params bn= 2×C(10)
whereCrepresents the number of channels in the input
feature map. Since a batch normalization layer contains two
learnable parameters per channel (a scaling factorγand an
offsetβ), the total number of parameters is2C.
In practice, the number of parameters for each layer
must be calculated according to the specific model architec-
ture. They are then summed to obtain the total number of
parameters of the CNN model, as shown in Eq. 11.
Params total =X
iParams convi+X
jParams fcj+X
kParams bnk
(11)
The inference time of the model on each task is de-
fined asT inf[41]. For consistent evaluation, all architectures
are tested with a single fixed-size input image of shape
(3,720,1080), representing 3 color RGB channels, 720 pixels
in height, and 1080 pixels in width, thus providing a unified
input baseline for inference time measurement.
3.2 Model Deployment
GSTC has identified high-quality neural architectures,
but their integration with deployment remains to be ad-
dressed. This subsection focuses on static deployment op-
timization. We construct models for system, deployment,
and routing. Latency is decomposed using M/M/C queuing
theory. By combining resource consumption and service
quality, we formulate a multi-objective optimization prob-
lem. This formulation links architecture with deployment
and provides a basis for the subsequent JCQDA algorithm.
3.2.1 System Model
We model a homogeneous server cluster in a cloud
data center, where all servers share identical hardware: the
same number of CPU cores and the same amount of GPU
memory. Communication latency between CPU cores on the
same server is negligible, while inter-server latency depends
mainly on request data size and network bandwidth. To
capture these physical and logical properties, the server
cluster is abstracted as an undirected graphG= (V, E),
whereVis the set of servers andEis the set of communi-
cation links. Each homogeneous server containsCCPUCPU
cores andCGPUunits of GPU memory. Furthermore, we

--- Page 6 ---
6
assume that each AI service instance is encapsulated in a
container and exclusively occupies one CPU core. So cores
are virtualized into container resources with a one-to-one
mapping between CPU cores and AI service instances.
3.2.2 Service Deployment Model
In this paper, each user request forms a strict task
chain of AI services, which may be deployed on one or
multiple servers and executed sequentially. Moreover, dif-
ferent requests can share services, which leads to service
multiplexing. LetM={m 1, m2, . . . , m |M|}denote the set
of all AI services in the system, andR={r 1, r2, . . . , r |R|}
denotes the set of all user requests. Each requestr∈R
can be represented as a tupler={M r, λr}, whereM r∈M
expresses the set of services inr, andλ rindicates the arrival
rate ofrunder a Poisson process.
To capture the multi-version coexistence and replace-
ability of online AI services, each logical servicemis as-
sumed to have a version setK m. Different versions vary in
service rate, service efficiency, and GPU memory consump-
tion. For versionkof microservicem, the service rate of a
single instance is denoted asµ m,k, which is given by Eq. 12.
µm,k=1
Tinf
m,k(12)
whereTinf
m,krefers to the inference time of AI servicemwhen
using neural architecture versionk.
Service performance is recorded asq m,k, maintaining
high correlation with GSTC scores. It is measured by task-
specific metrics such as accuracy or recall. While GPU mem-
ory consumption is denoted asCGPU
m,k , which is correlated
with model parameter count Params total.
In subsequent modeling, we represent services as logi-
cal microservices without further distinction. For microser-
vicem, a single instance has service rateµ m, service effi-
ciencyq m, and GPU memory consumptionCGPU
m . During
deployment, multiple instances of each service may run on
different servers. Co-location of dependent service instances
on the same server significantly reduces cross-server com-
munication delay. Therefore, under resource constraints, an
ideal strategy is to place all instances serving a request
on one server. In addition, the M/M/C queuing model
implies that for a fixed total number of instances, concen-
trating them on fewer servers lowers overall queuing delay.
Conversely, excessive distribution will increase it. Hence,
deployment should also concentrate instances of the same
service on a limited set of servers to reduce queuing delay.
Define the variableNv
mto represent the number of AI
servicemdeployed on the serverv. The deployment process
must satisfy the following constraints:
X
m∈MNv
m≤CCPU,∀v∈V(13)
X
m∈MNv
mCGPU
m≤CGPU,∀v∈V(14)
Eq. 13 and Eq. 14 respectively ensure that CPU and GPU
resources of each server are not over-allocated.
3.2.3 Request Routing Model
In practice, user requests arrive as a continuous stream
and are dispatched by a task scheduler to servers for pro-cessing. After assignment, the system sequentially invokes
AI services in the order of the task chain until the final re-
sponse is returned. To model the request–service mapping,
a binary variablexr
m∈ {0,1}is defined, wherexr
m= 1if
requestrinvolves servicem; otherwisexr
m= 0. Based on
the linear additivity of Poisson flow, the total arrival rate of
servicemcan be expressed as:
λm=X
r∈Rxr
mλr (15)
When the upstream AI service completes processing,
the system forwards the request to its downstream services
according to predefined dependencies. To this end, we
define the variablePv
mas the probability that requests of
microservicemare forwarded to serverv. To balance load,
Pv
mshould be dynamically calculated based on processing
capability and current load of servervas:
Pv
m=Nv
mP
v∈VNvm, m∈M(16)
in terms of Burke’s theorem and the linear additivity of
Poisson flow, the arrival rate of servicemat servervcan
be calculated as:
λv
m=λmPv
m (17)
3.2.4 System Latency Model
On each server, multiple instances of an AI service
run independently in parallel. For a given service type, all
instances can be modeled as a single M/M/C queuing sys-
tem, capturing its dynamic behavior under random arrivals.
The total delay includes average service queuing delay and
service time for inference. Hence, the total residence delay
of servicemon a server can be expressed as:
ts
m=Wq
m+1
µm(18)
whereµ mdenotes the service rate of servicem, andWq
m
represents its average queuing delay, which is derived from
steady-state analysis of the M/M/C queuing system as:
Wq
m=Lq
λvm(19)
Lq=(λv
m/µm)Nv
m·ρv
m
Nvm!·(1−ρvm)2·P0 (20)
ρv
m=λv
m
Nvmµm(21)
P0=
Nv
m−1X
n=0(λv
m/µm)n
n!+(λv
m/µm)Nv
m
Nvm!·1
1−ρvm
−1
(22)
whereL qdenotes the average queue length, whileρv
m
represents the service intensity of servicemon serverv. Set
ρv
m<1for stability. Otherwise the queue length will grow
infinitely, leading to congestion. Additionally,P 0indicates
the probability that the system is available.
AI services in a task chain are executed in a strict
sequence. If two adjacent services are deployed on the
same server, the communication latency is negligible. If

--- Page 7 ---
7
they are on different servers, the data transmission must
be considered:
ttran
mi,mj=data(m i, mj)
Bva,vb(23)
wheredata(m i, mj)represents the data volume transmitted
between servicem iandm j, whileB va,vbdenotes the link
bandwidth between serverv aandv b. In summary, the end-
to-end latency for requestrincludes both processing latency
of all AI services and cross-server communication latency:
Tr=|Mr|X
i=1ts
mi+|Mr|−1X
i=1ttran
mi,mi+1(24)
Finally, the overall system response time can be charac-
terized by the average end-to-end latency of all requests:
TAvg=P
r∈RλrTrP
r∈Rλr(25)
3.2.5 Resource Consumption Model
AI services typically require both CPU and GPU re-
sources during operation, but their computationally inten-
sive workloads are mainly handled by GPU. Considering
that GPU memory capacity differs more significantly across
service versions and is often the key constraint in system
deployment, this paper focuses on GPU resource consump-
tion. The GPU consumption on server v is denoted as:
CGPU
v=X
m∈MNv
mCGPU
m (26)
The constraintCGPU
v≤CGPUmust hold to prevent GPU
memory overflow, which will cause deployment failure or
runtime errors. At system level, the total resource consump-
tion is the sum of GPU usage over all servers:
Ctotal=X
v∈VCGPU
v (27)
3.2.6 User-Perceived QoS Model
User-Perceived Quality of Service (QoS) depends on
both the algorithmic performance and system response
latency. To evaluate QoS comprehensively, we construct a
composite metric that integrates these two components.
Each AI service is assessed by task-specific metricsq m,
such as accuracy and recall for classification, BLEU and
ROUGE for generation, and mAP for object detection, which
quantify its functional capability. For requestr, its overall
effectiveness is expressed as:
Qperf
r=1
|Mr|X
m∈M rqm (28)
To establish a trade-off to balance effectiveness and
latency, this study combines them into a composite QoS
metric. For requestr, its QoSQ ris defined as:
Qr=αQperf
r−(1−α)Tr
Tmax(29)
whereα∈[0,1]weights effectiveness versus latency in
QoS, andT maxis a normalization constant ensuring QoS
within a reasonable range. At the system level, overall QoSis computed as a weighted average of QoS values across all
requests:
Qsys=P
r∈RλrQrP
r∈Rλr(30)
3.2.7 Objective Function
After constructing the system model, deployment
model, request routing model, latency model, and the model
for resource consumption and QoS, we formulate a multi-
objective optimization problem. Under CPU and GPU re-
source constraints, the goal is to minimize total resource
consumption while maximizing the comprehensive QoS.
Total resource consumption is defined in Eq. 27, while
the first objective is to minimize it. The system-level QoS is
defined in Eq. 30, while the second objective is to maximize
it. In summary, the overall optimization problem is:
minCtotal
maxQsys (31)
To reflect the trade-off between resource consumption
and QoS while reducing computation, this paper adopts a
weighted-sum method to convert the multi-objective opti-
mization into a single-objective problem:
maxβQsys−(1−β)Ctotal
Cmax(32)
whereβ∈[0,1]is a tuning parameter andCmaxis a
normalization constant. By adjustingβ, the system can flex-
ibly balance QoS and resource consumption across different
application scenarios.
4 ALGORITHMDESIGN
Both static deployment and dynamic adjustment of
AI services in cloud data centers are NP-hard problems.
As the problem scale increases, the cost of exact solving
becomes very high. It is difficult to meet real-time de-
ployment requirements. Therefore, we design two efficient
heuristic algorithms. The first is the JCQDA algorithm. It
uses a service–server affinity mechanism to jointly optimize
communication latency and queuing latency, and it reduces
the system response latency. The second is the LAMRA
algorithm. When request intensity fluctuates, it evaluates
model performance and resource consumption together. It
dynamically selects the optimal version, ensures the stability
of service quality, and improves resource utilization.
4.1 Joint Communication and Queue-Aware Deploy-
ment Algorithm
As AI service deployment is NP-hard, the time to
find an exact optimum grows rapidly with problem size,
making real-time and scalable deployment impractical. To
address this, this study proposes the Joint Communica-
tion and Queue-Aware Deployment Algorithm (JCQDA),
which jointly optimizes communication and queuing delay
while remaining computationally efficient. JCQDA offers
two main advantages: (1) reducing system operational cost
and (2) minimizing end-to-end request latency.
Minimum Number of Instances for Each AI Service:
Since an AI service may be invoked by multiple requests,
and its instances may handle tasks from several requests

--- Page 8 ---
8
concurrently, we first need to determine the minimum num-
ber of instances for each AI service to ensure system stability
under the current load. According to the service intensity
constraint in Eq. 21, stability requiresρv
m<1. Thus, the
minimum number of instances required for servicemcan
be expressed as:
Nm=
(1 +θ)λm
µm
(33)
Eq. 33 introduces a relaxation factorθ≥0based on the
original stability constraint to absorb burst traffic or random
arrival fluctuations. By adjustingθ, the system can enhance
robustness against dynamic load variations.
Service-Server Affinity: AI service instances can be de-
ployed on any server with sufficient available CPU cores
and GPU memory. According to M/M/C queuing theory,
deploying instances of the same service on one server can
significantly reduce queuing delay for a fixed total instance
count. Simultaneously, co-locating sequentially dependent
services on the same server avoids cross-server transfer, thus
highly reducing communication delay. However, a potential
conflict exists between these two deployment strategies:
concentrating instances of the same service on one server
lowers queuing delay but consumes CPU and GPU re-
sources, limiting the deployment of its dependent services
on that server. To balance this trade-off, we introduce a ser-
vice–server affinity metric that comprehensively evaluates
the suitability and benefit of deploying the servicemon the
serverv, computed as:
Av
m=αAvailv
m+βPSv
m (34)
Among these,Availv
mrepresents the number of in-
stances of logical servicemthat can still be deployed on
serverv,PSv
mdenotes the number of existing instances on
vfrom services that depend onm. The hyperparameters
αandβrespectively weight the benefits from reduced
queuing delay and communication delay.
AI Service Deployment: After calculating the affinity
between the current service and all servers, we sort the
servers in descending order of affinity and iteratively place
one instance on the highest-ranked server until the planned
number of instances is reached.
4.2 Load-Aware Model Replacement Algorithm
In real systems, request intensity fluctuates over time.
Traditional approaches rely on elastic scaling, like adding
instances under high load. However, under tight resource
budgets, scaling has little effect, failing to handle complex
and variable patterns. To address this challenge, the Load-
Aware Model Replacement Algorithm (LAMRA) is pro-
posed, which adapts to load changes by switching between
service versions under finite hardware resources. Hence,
LAMRA enhances resource utilization and strengthens QoS
guarantees. Function 2 shows the detailed steps as follows:
Inference-Speed Threshold: When the change in request
intensity exceeds a preset threshold, we calculate the min-
imum inference speed required to meet the target QoS for
each microservice. This value is derived from the current
number of deployed instances and the real-time system
load, serves as the baseline for subsequent version selection.Function 1Joint Communication and Queue-Aware Deployment
Algorithm (JCQDA)
Require:
The set of all serversV, The set of all AI servicesM, The
set of all user service requestsR.
Ensure:
The deployment resultZ.
1:Initiate the remaining CPU cores on all servers
AvailCPU
v=CCPU, and the remaining GPU memory on
all serversAvailGPU
v=CGPU;
2:form∈Mdo
3:CalculateN maccording to Eq. 15 and Eq. 33;
4:end for
5:Sort all AI services inMin a descending order byN m;
6:form∈Mdo
7:forv∈Vdo
8:CalculateAv
maccording to Eq. 34;
9:end for
10:Sort all servers inVin a descending order byAv
m;
11:forv∈Vdo
12:ifAvailCPU
v−N m≥0then
13:AvailCPU
v=AvailCPU
v−N m;
14:AvailGPU
v=AvailGPU
v−N m·CGPU
m;
15:Xv
m=N m;
16:break;
17:else
18:AvailGPU
v=AvailGPU
v−AvailCPU
v·CGPU
m;
19:Xv
m=AvailCPU
v;
20:N m=N m−AvailCPU
v;
21:AvailCPU
v= 0;
22:end if
23:end for
24:end for
25:returnZ;
Candidate-Version Selection: Versions whose inference
speed is below the threshold are first removed to exclude
underperforming models from the candidate set. For the re-
maining versions, the Pareto optimality criterion is applied
to identify versions that are not dominated across service
rate, service efficiency, and GPU memory consumption.
Only these versions enter the candidate set, which narrows
the search space while preserving multi-metric superiority.
Candidate-Version Scoring: We quantitatively evaluate
all candidates. For versionk, a comprehensive score is
computed as a weighted sum of service rateµ m,k, GSTC
scoreGSTC m,k, and GPU memory consumptioncGPU
m,k:
score m,k=αµ m,k+βGSTC m,k+γCGPU
m,k (35)
whereα,β, andγare weighting coefficients that indicate
the relative importance of the three metrics in the overall
score. This weighted evaluation jointly reflects the process-
ing efficiency, quality level, and resource consumption of a
service, providing a quantitative basis for version selection.
Optimal-Version Replacement: After scoring, the ver-
sion with the highest score then replaces the current de-
ployed version. This dynamic replacement strategy enables
continuous improvement of service performance and re-
source utilization under fluctuating request intensity.

--- Page 9 ---
9
Function 2Load-Aware Model Replacement Algorithm
(LAMRA)
Require:
Set of all service requests after the arrival rate change
Rchange .
Ensure:
The set of new microservice versionsM change obtained
by the algorithm withR change .
1:M change ={};
2:form∈Mdo
3:Avail Km={};
4:Calculate the sum of the new request arrival ratesλ m
for AI servicemaccording to Eq. 15;
5:When the value in Eq. 21 is less than 1, calculate the
minimum processing rateµmin
mfor AI servicembased
onλ mandN m;
6:fork∈K mdo
7:ifµ m,k≥µmin
mthen
8:Avail Km=Avail Km∪mk;
9:end if
10:end for
11:Perform Pareto filtering on the versions in set
Avail Kmto obtain the frontier version set
Frontier Kmof the remaining models;
12:form k∈Frontier Kmdo
13:Calculate the score for versionkof microservicem
according to Eq. 35;
14:end for
15:Select the version with the highest scorem bestto
replace the original version;
16:M change =M change∪m best;
17:end for
18:returnM change ;
5 PROOF
We rigorously demonstrate the superiority of the joint
optimization of AI architecture design, deployment, and
routing from two complementary perspectives: theoretical
analyses of performance bounds (resource utilization, la-
tency, and service quality) and Lagrange constrained op-
timizations (constraint relaxation and duality gap). The for-
mer proves our method’s superior theoretical performance
limits, while the latter verifies it more closely approaches
the theoretical optimum in practice, providing a solid theo-
retical basis for subsequent experiments.
5.1 Basic Definitions and Core Assumptions
To ensure derivation rigor, we first clarify the key vari-
ables, their mathematical expressions, and physical mean-
ings and propose core assumptions based on experiments.
5.1.1 Key Variables
Correlation Coefficient: Letτ GSTC,P denote Kendall’s
τbetween GSTC scores and actual architecture perfor-
mance, and letτ FLOPs,P /τParams,P denote Kendall’sτbe-
tween FLOPs/Params and actual architecture performance
respectively. All coefficients range from [-1, 1], with higher
values indicating stronger positive correlations.Resource Utilization: For a given serverv, we define
the resource utilization of it as follows:
η(v) =P
m∈M Nv
m
CCPU
· P
m∈M Nv
mCGPU
m
CGPU!
(36)
this metric captures joint CPU–GPU utilization, and is high
only when both resources are efficiently used.
End-to-End Latency:T ris decomposed into queuing-
computing latencyts
miand cross-server communication la-
tencyttran
mi,mi+1, as shown in Eq. 24.
Service Quality:Q rcombines actual architecture
performanceQperf
r, and normalized end-to-end latency
Tr/Tmax, weighted byαand1−αto balance performance
and latency, as in Eq. 29.
Feasible Solution Space: Our method searches a larger
solution spaceΩ, jointly optimizing architecture selection,
deployment decisionsNv
m, and routingPmj,vbmi,va. In contrast,
baselines search only a smaller spaceΩ 0, where the architec-
ture is fixed without GSTC screening, and only deployment
and routing are adjusted.
Constraint:
g1(v) =X
m∈MNv
m−CCPU≤0(37)
g2(v) =X
m∈MNv
mCGPU
m−CGPU≤0(38)
g3(r) =T r−T max≤0(39)
g1(v)is the CPU capacity constraint consistent with Eq. 13,
g2(v)is the GPU capacity constraint consistent with Eq. 14,
andg 3(r)is the latency constraint, whereT maxdenotes the
maximum tolerable latency.
Lagrange Multiplier: We introduce non-negative La-
grange multipliersλ 1(v),λ 2(v)andλ 3(r), which are associ-
ated with constraintsg 1(v),g 2(v)andg 3(r), respectively.
These multipliers satisfy the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT)
conditions: dual feasibilityλ 1(v), λ 2(v), λ 3(r)≥0, comple-
mentary slacknessλ i·gi(·) = 0, and Lagrangian stationarity.
5.1.2 Core Assumptions
GSTC Correlation Advantage: As shown in Table 2, the
correlation between GSTC scores and the true performance
satisfiesτ GSTC,P > τ FLOPs,P andτ GSTC,P > τ Params,P .This
indicates that GSTC characterizes architecture performance
more effectively than FLOPs and Params.
Correlation-Performance Mapping: A higherτmeans
the selected architecture better matches the “high-
performance and low-resource” goal of GSTC. In particular,
asτincreases,CGPU
m tends to decrease andµ m(the service
rate of servicemdefined in Eq. 12) tends to increase.
Slater Condition Satisfaction: The joint optimization
problem admits strictly feasible solutions as Eq. 37, Eq.38
and Eq.39. Hence, the Slater condition holds, which guar-
antees the applicability of the strong duality theorem and
yields zero duality gap for the convex formulation.
5.2 Proof of Performance Bounds
This subsection compares theoretical boundaries of
resource utilization, latency, and service quality between

--- Page 10 ---
10
joint optimization and baselines, proving the former admits
strictly superior performance limits.
Theorem 1. Joint optimization has a higher upper
bound of resource utilization.
Proof.First, we list some general constraints and variables.
Define GPU 0as the average per-instance GPU memory
consumption of fixed, less stable baseline architectures, and
GPU GSTC as that of high-quality architectures selected by
GSTC. Since GSTC correlates more strongly with true per-
formance than FLOPs and Params, GPU GSTC <GPU 0. Let
γ∈(0,1)denote the deployment redundancy coefficient,
with more stable architectural resource demand correspond-
ing toγcloser to 1. The redundancy coefficients of baseline
and GSTC architectures areγ 0andγ GSTC , respectively. Un-
der this setting, the GPU memory constraint on servervis:
X
m∈MNv
m·GPU≤γ·CGPU(40)
Second, baseline architectures exhibit poor resource
stability, requiring a larger redundancy margin, that is,
γ0< γ GSTC . Under the GPU memory constraintP
m∈M Nv
m·
GPU 0≤γ 0·CGPU, the maximum number of deployable
instances on servervof baseline architectures is defined as:
X
m∈MNv,max
m,0≤γ0·CGPU
GPU 0(41)
substituting this bound into the expression ofη(v)as shown
in Eq. 36 yields the following upper bound on the average
resource utilization of the baseline algorithms:
¯η0≤γ2
0
|V|X
v∈VCGPU
GPU 0·CCPU(42)
Similarly, for GSTC architectures, under the GPU mem-
ory constraintP
m∈M Nv
m·GPU GSTC≤γ GSTC·CGPU, the
maximum number of deployable instances on servervof
joint optimization is bounded by:
X
m∈MNv,max
m,joint≤γGSTC·CGPU
GPU GSTC(43)
substituting this bound intoη(v)yields the upper bound on
the average resource utilization of joint optimization:
¯η≤γ2
GSTC
|V|X
v∈VCGPU
GPU GSTC·CCPU(44)
Finally, sinceγ GSTC > γ 0and GPU GSTC <GPU 0, we
can make a comparison between the upper bound of¯ηand
¯η0. Let¯η∗= max Ω¯η, and let¯η∗
0= max Ω0¯η0, so we prove
¯η∗>¯η∗
0. Therefore, joint optimization has a higher upper
bound of resource utilization than baselines.
Theorem 2. Joint optimization has a lower lower bound
of latency.
Proof.From Eq. 24, we decomposite the end-to-end latency
for the requestrinto three parts, which can be expressed as:
Tr=Tcomp
r+Tque
r+Tcomm
r (45)
whereTcomp
r ,Tque
r, andTcomm
r denote computation, queuing,
and communication latency, respectively.
For computation, sinceτ GSTC,P > τ FLOPs,P and
τGSTC,P > τ Params,P , GSTC architectures provide higherservice rates, that is,µ m,0< µ m,GSTC . As Eq. 18, we have
computation latency:
Tcomp
r =X
m∈M1
µm(46)
thereby leading toTcomp
r,0> Tcomp
r,joint .
For queuing, we adopt the M/M/C model with ser-
vice intensityρv
m=λv
m
Nvmµmin Eq. 21, so smallerρv
mim-
plies smallerTque
r. Sinceγ 0< γ GSTC and GPU GSTC <
GPU 0, we haveP
m∈M Nv,max
m,0 <P
m∈M Nv,max
m,joint . Com-
bined withµ m,0< µ m,GSTC , this yields toρv
m,0> ρv
m,joint ,
and henceTque
r,0> Tque
r,joint .
For communication,Tcomm
r decreases as more depen-
dent services are co-located on the same servers. Baselines
fail to incorporate the “service–server affinity” design in
Section 4.1, which results in more cross-server deployment
of dependent services and thereforeTcomm
r,0 > Tcomm
r,joint .
Summing the three components for each requestrin
Eq. 45, we haveT r,joint < T r,0. Then average over all
requestsr∈Rbyλ rin Eq. 25. In the solution space
Ω/Ω 0, we find the minimum value ofT Avg. LetT min,joint =
minΩTAvg,joint denote the minimum average latency of joint
optimization, andT min,0 = min Ω0TAvg,0 denote that of base-
lines. Accordingly,T min,joint < T min,0 , which proves the joint
optimization achieves strictly lower latency than baselines.
Theorem 3. Joint optimization has a higher upper
bound of service quality.
Proof.Combining Eq. 29 with Eq. 30, we define the average
service quality as:
Qsys=X
r∈RλrαQperf
r−(1−α)Tr
TmaxP
r∈Rλr(47)
whereQperf
rdenotes the overall effectiveness of requestr
andT ris its end-to-end latency.
As discussed in Section 6.1, the fixed baseline archi-
tectures exhibit poor performance adaptability, so satisfy
Qperf
r,0< Qperf
r,GSTC . Furthermore, Theorem 2 showsT r,0>
Tr,joint . Taking the two inequalities into account, and using
the definitionQ r=αQperf
r−(1−α)Tr
Tmaxin Eq. 29, we obtain
the per-request inequalityQ r,0< Q r,joint .
For allr∈R, taking the average over all requests yieldsP
r∈RλrQr,jointP
r∈Rλr>P
r∈RλrQr,0P
r∈Rλr, which meansQsys> Qsys
0. In
the solution spaceΩ/Ω 0, we find the maximum value of
Qsys/Qsys
0, respectively. LetQsys∗= max ΩQsysdenote the
maximum average service quality of joint optimization, and
Qsys∗
0= max ΩQsys
0denote that of baselines. ThenQsys∗>
Qsys∗
0. In summary, the joint optimization provides strictly
higher service quality than the baseline algorithms.
Corollary. Joint optimization has a higher unified ob-
jective function value.
Following the multi-objective optimization formulation
in Eq. 32, we define the unified objective as:
J=ω 1·¯η−ω 2·TAvg+ω3·Qsys(48)
whereω 1+ω2+ω3= 1andω 1, ω2, ω3>0.

--- Page 11 ---
11
From Theorems 1–3, we have¯η∗>¯η∗
0,T min,joint <
Tmin,0 , andQsys∗> Qsys∗
0. The optimal unified objective is:
J∗
joint=ω 1¯η∗−ω2Tmin,joint +ω3Qsys∗
> ω 1¯η∗
0−ω2Tmin,0+ω3Qsys∗
0=J∗
0(49)
5.3 Proof of Constrained Optimizations
This subsection converts the optimization problem into
a constrained extremum problem and analyzes its La-
grangian dual. By analyzing constraint relaxation and du-
ality gap, we verify that joint optimization attains perfor-
mance closer to the theoretical optimum than the baselines.
5.3.1 Construction of Lagrange Functions
We maximize the unified objectiveJunder CPU con-
straintsg 1(v), GPU constraintsg 2(v), and latency con-
straintsg 3(r). By the KKT conditions, we introduce nonneg-
ative Lagrange multipliersλ 1(v),λ 2(v), andλ 3(r)forg 1(v),
g2(v), andg 3(r), respectively. The Lagrangian function of
the joint optimization problem is:
Ljoint =J joint−X
v∈Vλ1(v)g 1(v)−X
v∈Vλ2(v)g 2(v)−X
r∈Rλ3(r)g 3(r)
(50)
For the baseline algorithms, we fix the architectures
(CGPU
m,0 > CGPU
m,GSTC ,µm,0< µ m,GSTC ) and optimize only
deployment and routing. Introducing baseline multipliers
λ′
1(v),λ′
2(v), andλ′
3(r)for the same constraintsg 1(v),
g2(v), andg 3(r), the Lagrangian function for the baseline
optimization problem becomes:
L0=J 0−X
v∈Vλ′
1(v)g 1(v)−X
v∈Vλ′
2(v)g 2(v)−X
r∈Rλ′
3(r)g 3(r)(51)
5.3.2 Comparison of KKT Optimal Conditions
We compare the KKT stationarity conditions of the joint
optimization and the baselines with respect to the decision
variableNv
m, taking partial derivatives ofL jointandL 0and
setting them to zero.
For joint optimization, we have a gradient condition as:
∂L joint
∂Nvm=ω 1·2P
m∈M Nv
m·CGPU
m,GSTC
|V| ·CCPU·CGPU−ω2·∂Tr,joint
∂Nvm
+ω3·α·∂Qperf
r,GSTC
∂Nvm−λ1(v)−λ 2(v)·CGPU
m,GSTC = 0
(52)
Under joint optimization, GSTC selects architectures
with small GPU memory consumption, soCGPU
m,GSTC is small
and the penalty termλ 2(v)·CGPU
m,GSTC is reduced. For a fixed
GPU capacity, more instances can be deployed and queuing
pressure remains moderate. WhenNv
mgrows, the marginal
latency reduction diminishes, so∂T r,joint/∂Nv
mstays small.
Meanwhile, GSTC offers higher performance adaptability,
making it more sensitive to load. As a result, increasingNv
m
yields considerable performance gains, and∂Qperf
r,GSTC /∂Nv
m
is relatively large. Overall, benefits are substantial and costs
are minimal. To satisfy the stationarity condition in Eq.
52, the multipliersλ 1(v)andλ 2(v)therefore remain small,
indicating looser CPU and GPU constraints.For general optimization, the gradient condition is:
∂L0
∂Nvm=ω 1·2P
m∈M Nv
m·CGPU
m,0
|V| ·CCPU·CGPU−ω2·∂Tr,0
∂Nvm
+ω3·α·∂Qperf
r,0
∂Nvm−λ′
1(v)−λ′
2(v)·CGPU
m,0= 0(53)
Here the fixed baseline architectures have larger GPU
memory consumption per instance, soCGPU
m,0 is large and the
termλ′
2(v)·CGPU
m,0 has a stronger penalty. Resources in base-
lines are constrained. With limited deployable instances, the
system often runs under high load, and queuing latency
is highly sensitive to the number of instances. In this case,
increasingNv
mwill bring significant latency reduction, and
∂Tr,0/∂Nv
mhas large magnitude. Furthermore, the lower
performance adaptability leads to a smaller∂Qperf
r,0/∂Nv
m.
In summary, the benefits are small and the costs are large.
To balance the equality in Eq. 53, the multipliersλ′
1(v)
andλ′
2(v)must exceed their counterparts in the joint op-
timization, that is,λ′
1(v)> λ 1(v)andλ′
2(v)> λ 2(v). This
indicates tighter CPU and GPU constraints and a smaller
feasible region compared with joint optimization.
5.3.3 Verification of Duality Gaps
We show that joint optimization exhibits a smaller du-
ality gap than the baselines. Consistent with the constraints
defined in this paper, we construct the dual functions from
the Lagrangians for joint optimization and baseline algo-
rithms, respectively.
djoint(λ) = max
Nvm,PLjoint(Nv
m, P, λ)(54)
d0(λ′) = max
Nv
m,PL0(Nv
m, P, λ′)(55)
whereNv
mdenotes deployment decisions, andPdenotes
routing variables. We fix multipliersλandλ′, changing
primitive variablesNv
m, Pto maximizeL jointandL 0.
Since the optimization problems here satisfy Slater’s
condition, the strong duality theorem applies. Hence, the
optimal primal value equals the optimal dual value when
the duality gap approaches zero.
For the proposed joint optimization, GSTC finds more
adaptable architectures and the server configuration offers
sufficient resource redundancy. As discussed earlier, this
leads to abundant strictly feasible solutions far from the con-
straint boundaries, and the associated Lagrange multipliers
remain small. In this case, the Lagrangian relaxation is tight
and the dual functiond joint(λ)closely matches the primal
objective, making the duality gap negligible. Consequently,
the actual performance of joint optimization is very close to
the theoretical optimum.
In contrast, baselines rely on fixed architectures with
high GPU consumption and low service rate, which
shrink the feasible region. Many solutions operate near
the CPU/GPU and latency limits, producing large KKT
multipliers and a looser Lagrangian relaxation. As a result,
the dual functiond 0(λ′)provides a conservative upper
bound and a larger duality gap. This implies that baseline
performance deviates more from its theoretical upper bound
than in the proposed joint optimization.

--- Page 12 ---
12
(a) CIFAR10
 (b) ImageNet16-120
 (c) Object Classification
 (d) Scene Classification
(e) Semantic Segmentation
 (f) Room Layout
 (g) Surface Normal
 (h) Jigsaw
Fig. 3: Correlation plot between GSTC scores of sampled untrained architectures and post-training validation accuracy.
5.4 Remarks
Comprehensive derivation confirms three conclusions:
1) Superior theoretical boundaries: Based on the high
correlation of GSTC, joint optimization has higher
upper bounds of resource utilization and service
quality, and a lower lower bound of latency. Conse-
quently, the theoretical value of its unified objective
function strictly exceeds that of the baseline.
2) Better practical performance: Lagrange multiplier
verification shows joint optimization has looser con-
straints and a narrower duality gap, making its
actual performance closer to theoretical optima. In
contrast, baselines suffer from tighter constraints
and a larger duality gap, which limit their achiev-
able performance.
3) Fundamental source advantage: GSTC performs
”low-resource, high-performance” screening at the
architecture design stage, breaking the baseline’s
vicious cycle of fixed architectures, resource waste,
and increased latency, and creating a coordinative
advantage across the full lifecycle.
In summary, the mathematical analysis shows that joint
optimization of AI architecture design, deployment, and
routing achieves synergistic optima of resource usage, la-
tency, and service quality in both theory and practice, with
performance significantly exceeding algorithms that only
optimize deployment and routing.
6 PERFORMANCEEVALUATION
In this chapter, we first design validation experiments
on three classic datasets to assess the resulting correlation
of proxy models. We compare our approach with general
proxies based on FLOP and #Params, and classic proxies
SNIP [26], GraSP [22], Fisher [42], Synflow [27], and GradTABLE 2: Correlation coefficients of zero-cost proxies and
the two original proxies (#Params and FLOPs) (KT and SPR
denote Kendall’sτand Spearman’sρrespectively).
The best results are shown in bold.
NAS-Bench-201 NAS-Bench-101
Dataset CIFAR10 CIFAR100 Img16-120 CIFAR10
Proxy Correlation KT SPR KT SPR KT SPR KT SPR
Grad norm 0.46 0.63 0.47 0.63 0.43 0.58 -0.17 -0.25
SNIP 0.46 0.63 0.46 0.63 0.43 0.58 -0.12 -0.17
GraSP 0.37 0.54 0.36 0.51 0.40 0.56 0.20 0.29
Fisher 0.40 0.55 0.41 0.55 0.37 0.50 -0.20 -0.28
Synflow 0.54 0.73 0.57 0.76 0.56 0.75 0.23 0.35
Zen-score 0.29 0.38 0.28 0.36 0.29 0.40 0.46 0.63
FLOPs 0.54 0.73 0.51 0.71 0.49 0.67 0.31 0.44
#Params 0.570.75 0.55 0.73 0.52 0.69 0.31 0.43
GSTC (Ours) 0.57 0.77 0.56 0.75 0.54 0.74 0.50 0.70
norm [23], as well as the recent Zen-score [43]. We then
conduct a multi-dimensional comparison of our deployment
algorithm against CDRA [44], CDS [45], MDSGA [46], and
GRLS [47], under static deployment and dynamic load
adaptation across small, medium, and large-scale network
settings. In this way, we can comprehensively demonstrate
the performance of our algorithm under varying conditions.
6.1 Proxy Model Validation Results
This subsection evaluates GSTC’s ability to character-
ize architecture performance: its representational capability,
effectiveness, and reliability. To this end, we compare it
with classic and recent proxy models. Common methods
based on FLOPs and #Params respectively use floating-
point operation counts and parameter statistics to quantify
performance. Among classic proxies, Grad norm [23], GraSP
[22], and Fisher [42] all employ gradient or curvature in-
formation: Grad norm calculates gradient norm, and GraSP
further analyzes the effect of weight removal using Hessian-
gradient products, while Fisher evaluates parameter impor-

--- Page 13 ---
13
(a) Request arrival rate
 (b) Request length
 (c) Number of request types
Fig. 4: Comparison of latency across different algorithms when deployment costs are equivalent.
tance via Fisher information. In contrast, SNIP [26] assesses
connection sensitivity, while Synflow [27] simultaneously
performs pruning and evaluation based on synaptic flow
conservation. Recent methods adopt alternative metrics:
Zen-score [43] estimates network complexity through ap-
proximate gradients. All comparisons are conducted on
NAS-Bench-101 [38], NAS-Bench-201 [48], and the multi-
scenario TransNAS-Bench-101 [41], with Kendall’sτand
Spearman’sρas evaluation metrics.
To assess the performance, generalizability, and robust-
ness of GSTC, we first compare Kendall’sτand Spearman’s
ρof multiple proxy models on NAS-Bench-101 and NAS-
Bench-201 datasets in CIFAR-10 [49], CIFAR-100 [49], and
ImageNet16-120 [37]. As shown in Table 2, GSTC achieves
strong correlations across datasets and tasks. On NAS-
Bench-201 (CIFAR-10), GSTC reachesρ= 0.77, higher
than SynFlow (0.73) and #Params (0.75). On NAS-Bench-101
(CIFAR-10), it achievesτ= 0.50andρ= 0.70, clearly above
FLOPs (0.31, 0.44), avoiding the negative correlation seen
in Grad norm. This advantage stems from its information-
based encoding and a four-dimensional assessment system
of “total path information, path variation, output node
information, and output variation.” This design captures
structural features and task adaptability, providing support
for subsequent deployment optimization.
To further visualize GSTC in multi-task scenarios, we
plot scatter charts in Fig. 3. Figs. 3a–3h show the relationship
between GSTC scores of randomly sampled untrained archi-
tectures and their post-training validation accuracy in the
NAS-Bench-101, NAS-Bench-201, and TransNAS-Bench-101
search spaces across eight industrial AI service scenarios:
CIFAR10 [36], ImageNet16-120 [50], Object Classification,
Scene Classification, Semantic Segmentation, Room Layout,
Surface Normal, and Jigsaw [41]. The horizontal axis in-
dicates accuracy, while the vertical axis denotes the proxy
score. Across all search-space/dataset combinations, GSTC
scores for untrained architectures are positively correlated
with post-training validation accuracy, with particularly
strong trends on TransNAS-Bench-101 (τ= 0.549for Scene
Classification andτ= 0.589for Surface Normal). Even
in the large-scale ImageNet task in Fig. 3b, the correlation
remains relatively high at 0.539. The results indicate that
GSTC not only performs well on small datasets but also
transfers to larger, more complex real-world datasets, con-
firming the generality and effectiveness of the GSTC proxy
score. It enables preliminary, training-free assessment of
architecture performance and provides a key foundation forsubsequent AI service deployment optimization algorithms.
6.2 Deployment Model Validation Results
We evaluate the proposed JCQDA deployment algo-
rithm and the LAMRA dynamic replacement algorithm
against four baselines: CDRA, CDS, MDSGA, and GRLS,
using average end-to-end latency, service accuracy, and
GPU memory consumption as metrics. Among these, CDRA
[44] deploys services by request priority, satisfying latency
constraints by increasing instance counts. CDS [45] attempts
to co-locate microservices from the same request chain
on a single server to reduce cross-server communication.
MDSGA [46] avoids local optima via improved encoding
and a catastrophe mechanism, randomly initializing in-
stance counts and iteratively adjusting them. GRLS [47]
constructs an initial solution greedily and refines it by local
search, setting instance counts based on request volume and
processing rate.
To ensure fair comparison in static deployment, all
baselines use the same number of CPU cores as JCQDA,
with a unified setting of arrival rate 400, request length 6,
and 30 request types, and Figs. 4a–4c illustrate how latency
varies with these variables.
Under higher arrival rate, JCQDA achieves 0.85 average
latency, versus 1.48 (CDRA), 3.14 (MDSGA), 0.98 (GRLS),
and 2.76 (CDS). When the request length increases, JCQDA
remains at 0.88 latency, while most baselines exceed 1.5.
When the number of request types grows, JCQDA still
maintains 0.87 latency, while CDRA, MDSGA, and CDS
increase to 1.49, 3.23, and 2.70, respectively. This comes from
the “service-server affinity” design and the ‘communication-
queuing collaborative perception” mechanism, which re-
duce both cross-server transmission and waiting time. As
a result, it maintains stable end-to-end latency, achieving
efficient resource scheduling in static deployments.
In addition, we conduct dynamic scenario validation in
small, medium, and large-scale networks respectively.
6.2.1 Small-Scale Networks
Under dynamic load in small-scale networks, LAMRA
outperforms CDRA, MDSGA, GRLS, and CDS on average
end-to-end latency, service accuracy, and GPU memory
consumption. In Fig. 5a, it achieves 0.19 average latency,
38% lower than all baselines, 62.7% lower than MDSGA
and 38.7% lower than GRLS. In Fig. 5b, LAMRA attains
0.932 average accuracy (2.76% higher than CDRA). In Fig.

--- Page 14 ---
14
(a) Average end-to-end latency
 (b) Average service accuracy
 (c) GPU Memory consumption
Fig. 5: Relationship between various metrics and time cycles for different algorithms in small-scale networks.
(a) Average end-to-end latency
 (b) Average service accuracy
 (c) GPU Memory consumption
Fig. 6: Relationship between various metrics and time cycles for different algorithms in medium-scale networks.
(a) Average end-to-end latency
 (b) Average service accuracy
 (c) GPU Memory consumption
Fig. 7: Relationship between various metrics and time cycles for different algorithms in large-scale networks.
5c, LAMRA achieves 153.1 GB average GPU memory con-
sumption (19.7% lower than CDRA).
The gains are attributed to the end-to-end pipeline
combining GSTC zero-cost evaluation and JCQDA static
deployment, which covers “load awareness, model replace-
ment, and deployment linkage.’ GSTC rapidly selects “high-
accuracy, low-resource” architectures without full training.
LAMRA monitors load fluctuations in real time and chooses
architectures guided by GSTC to maintain accuracy while
controlling GPU memory consumption. During model re-
placement, JCQDA deployment parameters are simultane-
ously updated to avoid latency issues caused by improper
deployment. At the same time, it employs Pareto frontier
selection to balance multiple metrics. Conversely, baselines
mainly adjust instance counts or container placement and
lack architecture-level optimization.
6.2.2 Medium-Scale Networks
In medium-scale networks, LAMRA remains ahead
across the same three metrics: average end-to-end latency
is 0.27 in Fig. 6a, which is 75.9%, 88.2%, 64.0%, and 84.5%
lower than CDRA (1.12), MDSGA (2.28), GRLS (0.75), and
CDS (1.74), respectively. In Fig. 6b, its average accuracy is0.911, 1.56% higher than CDRA (0.897). In Fig. 6c, its GPU
memory is 566 GB, 22.4% lower than CDRA (729.3).
The dynamic adjustment mechanism of LAMRA makes
its advantages particularly evident in medium-scale net-
works. On one hand, with servers and complex depen-
dencies, JCQDA’s service–server affinity prioritizes placing
dependent services on nodes with better links, sharply
reducing cross-server latency. In contrast, the baselines lack
such coordination, leading to a marked latency increase
as the number of nodes grows. On the other hand, load
fluctuations occur more frequently in medium-scale net-
works. With the evaluation system built on the information-
quantity quantization encoding mechanism, GSTC can pre-
cisely match architectures to current load, avoiding accuracy
loss or resource waste from poor architectural adaptation.
6.2.3 Large-Scale Networks
In large-scale networks, LAMRA continues to lead on
latency, accuracy, and GPU memory consumption. In Fig.
7a, LAMRA achieves an average end-to-end latency of
0.37, reducing latency by 88.5%, 94.7%, 79.8%, and 93.6%
compared to CDRA (3.21), MDSGA (7.03), GRLS (1.83), and
CDS (5.78), respectively. For accuracy in Fig. 7b, LAMRA

--- Page 15 ---
15
reaches 0.921, a 2.45% improvement over CDRA at 0.899.
It maintains stable and high efficiency even under condi-
tions of increased server counts and more complex service
dependencies. For GPU memory consumption in Fig. 7c,
LAMRA uses 1383.7 GB on average, a 14.8% reduction from
1624.3 GB for CDRA, effectively controlling resource usage
in large-scale networks.
LAMRA demonstrates strong performance in large-
scale networks because its closed-loop “static deployment,
dynamic adjustment” mechanism aligns deeply with the
setting’s needs. Particularly, when complex load fluctua-
tions occur, LAMRA jointly replaces architectures and up-
dates deployment parameters, avoiding system-level la-
tency, while GSTC supports real-time replacement. How-
ever, baselines are largely limited to adjusting instance
counts, and the gap widens as scale increases, further val-
idating the reliability of this collaborative framework in
complex environments.
6.2.4 Resource Efficiency Across Networks
To assess the resource efficiency of LAMRA, we fix
CDRA, MDSGA, GRLS, and CDS to the same end-to-end
latency as LAMRA, comparing GPU memory usage across
network scales as shown in Fig. 8. The experiment shows
that LAMRA delivers consistent GPU savings at all scales,
over 55% in small-scale networks (even reaching 82.5%
versus MDSGA), 49.3%–75.4% in medium-scale networks,
and 44.9%–72.9% in large-scale networks.
The GPU memory efficiency of LAMRA arises from the
collaborative optimization of architecture screening, model
selection, and deployment constraints via GSTC and JC-
QDA. GSTC embeds resource awareness at the design stage,
identifying “performance-resource balanced” architectures,
eliminating GPU redundancy at the source. LAMRA then
employs Pareto frontier selection and weighted scoring to
favor models with lower GPU memory under latency con-
straints. JCQDA deployment rules precisely assess server
GPU capacity, preventing waste from overflow. In con-
trast, baselines mainly adjust instance counts or placement
and therefore remain GPU-inefficient even when meet-
ing latency requirements. End-to-end collaboration allows
LAMRA to keep response speed while using GPU mem-
ory efficiently, further verifying the practicality of our full-
lifecycle collaborative optimization across network scales.
7 CONCLUSIONS
This paper has addressed the key challenges in AI
service lifecycle management, including the separation be-
tween design and deployment and insufficient dynamic
adaptation. It has constructed the end-to-end collaborative
framework “GSTC-JCQDA-LAMRA”, which links neural
architecture design with dynamic deployment for the first
time. GSTC introduces an innovative information-quantity
quantization encoding mechanism for zero-cost evalua-
tion, efficiently capturing the relationship between net-
work structural features and performance. In multi-dataset
and multi-task settings, its correlation metrics outperform
mainstream proxies like FLOPs and Synflow. It reduces
evaluation overhead while providing deployment-suitable
Fig. 8: Algorithm GPU memory consumption across net-
work scales.
architectural foundations. On this basis, JCQDA models la-
tency with an M/M/C queuing model and a service-server
affinity to balance communication and queuing delays.
LAMRA performs load-aware model replacement using the
GSTC pre-evaluated library with Pareto frontier selection
and dynamic deployment adjustment. Together, they com-
plete full-lifecycle optimization. Theoretical mathematical
analyses have shown that the framework achieves a higher
upper bound of resource utilization and service quality,
a lower lower bound on latency, looser constraints, and
a smaller duality gap. Its practical performance is closer
to the theoretical optimum. In summary, this framework
has achieved a multi-objective balance among performance,
resource utilization, and service quality, providing a new
perspective for AI systems. Future work will further extend
it to heterogeneous hardware and multimodal AI service
scenarios, and improve cross-scenario adaptability.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Hu, Q. Li, Y. Chai, D. Wu, L. Lu, N. Shi, Y. Teng, and Y. Zhang,
“Ai service deployment and resource allocation optimization
based on human-like networking architecture,”IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 24 795–24 813, 2024.
[2] H. Zhou, C. Hu, D. Yuan, Y. Yuan, D. Wu, X. Liu, Z. Han, and
J. Zhang, “Generative ai as a service in 6g edge-cloud: Generation
task offloading by in-context learning,”IEEE Wireless Communica-
tions Letters, 2024.
[3] O. F. Bustinza, L. M. Molina, F. Vendrell-Herrero, and M. Opazo-
Basaez, “Ai-enabled smart manufacturing boosts ecosystem value
capture: The importance of servitization pathways within digital-
intensive industries,”International Journal of Production Economics,
vol. 277, p. 109411, 2024.
[4] J. Xu, Q. Sun, Q.-L. Han, and Y. Tang, “When embodied ai meets
industry 5.0: Human-centered smart manufacturing,”IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 485–501, 2025.
[5] L. J. Fahrner, E. Chen, E. Topol, and P . Rajpurkar, “The generative
era of medical ai,”Cell, vol. 188, no. 14, pp. 3648–3660, 2025.
[6] M. Reis, F. Reis, and W. Kunde, “Influence of believed ai involve-
ment on the perception of digital medical advice,”Nature Medicine,
vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 3098–3100, 2024.
[7] S. Chen, Y. Liao, F. Wang, G. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Wang, and X. Zhu,
“Toward the robustness of autonomous vehicles in the ai era,”The
Innovation, vol. 6, no. 3, 2025.
[8] D. Rossi and L. Zhang, “Landing ai on networks: An equipment
vendor viewpoint on autonomous driving networks,”IEEE Trans-
actions on Network and Service Management, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 3670–
3684, 2022.

--- Page 16 ---
16
[9] C. Wu, Q. Peng, Y. Xia, Y. Jin, and Z. Hu, “Towards cost-effective
and robust ai microservice deployment in edge computing envi-
ronments,”Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 141, pp. 129–
142, 2023.
[10] S. Zeb, M. A. Rathore, S. A. Hassan, S. Raza, K. Dev, and
G. Fortino, “Toward ai-enabled nextg networks with edge
intelligence-assisted microservice orchestration,”IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 148–156, 2023.
[11] Y. Hu, H. Wang, L. Wang, M. Hu, K. Peng, and B. Veeravalli, “Joint
deployment and request routing for microservice call graphs in
data centers,”IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 2994–3011, 2023.
[12] M. Hu, Z. Guo, H. Wen, Z. Wang, B. Xu, J. Xu, and K. Peng, “Col-
laborative deployment and routing of industrial microservices in
smart factories,”IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2024.
[13] K. T. Chitty-Venkata and A. K. Somani, “Neural architecture search
survey: A hardware perspective,”ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55,
no. 4, pp. 1–36, 2022.
[14] K. Peng, L. Wang, J. He, C. Cai, and M. Hu, “Joint optimization
of service deployment and request routing for microservices in
mobile edge computing,”IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1016–1028, 2024.
[15] P . Lai, Y. Chen, S. Lin, T. Liao, Y. Hu, M. Hu, X. Zhang, Y. Xie, and
J. Qin, “Intelligent autoscaling of microservice and request routing
for dynamic service requests,”IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2025.
[16] H. T. T. Nguyen, L. P . T. Nguyen, and H. Cao, “Xedgeai: A human-
centered industrial inspection framework with data-centric ex-
plainable edge ai approach,”Information Fusion, vol. 116, p. 102782,
2025.
[17] K. Riou, K. Dong, K. Subrin, and P . Le Callet, “Reinforcement
learning based tactile sensing for active point cloud acquisition,
recognition and localization,”IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Signal Processing, 2024.
[18] W. Chen, L. Bruzzone, B. Dang, Y. Gao, Y. Deng, J.-G. Yu, L. Yuan,
and Y. Li, “Rest: Holistic learning for end-to-end semantic segmen-
tation of whole-scene remote sensing imagery,”IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2025.
[19] X. Wang, Y. Zhao, C. Qiu, F. Gao, Z. Zhao, H. Yao, and X. Li,
“Energy-friendly federated neural architecture search for indus-
trial cyber-physical systems,”IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, 2025.
[20] Z. Zhong, X. Liu, J. Jiang, D. Zhao, and S. Wang, “Dual-level
cross-modality neural architecture search for guided image super-
resolution,”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 2025.
[21] Y. Liu, Y. Sun, B. Xue, M. Zhang, G. G. Yen, and K. C. Tan, “A sur-
vey on evolutionary neural architecture search,”IEEE transactions
on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 550–570,
2021.
[22] C. Wang, G. Zhang, and R. Grosse, “Picking winning tick-
ets before training by preserving gradient flow,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.07376, 2020.
[23] M. S. Abdelfattah, A. Mehrotra, Ł. Dudziak, and N. D.
Lane, “Zero-cost proxies for lightweight nas,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.08134, 2021.
[24] J. Mellor, J. Turner, A. Storkey, and E. J. Crowley, “Neural architec-
ture search without training,” inInternational conference on machine
learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 7588–7598.
[25] X. Ning, C. Tang, W. Li, Z. Zhou, S. Liang, H. Yang, and Y. Wang,
“Evaluating efficient performance estimators of neural architec-
tures,”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34,
pp. 12 265–12 277, 2021.
[26] N. Lee, T. Ajanthan, and P . H. Torr, “Snip: Single-shot net-
work pruning based on connection sensitivity,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.02340, 2018.
[27] H. Tanaka, D. Kunin, D. L. Yamins, and S. Ganguli, “Pruning neu-
ral networks without any data by iteratively conserving synaptic
flow,”Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp.
6377–6389, 2020.
[28] Y. Chai, K. Gao, G. Zhang, L. Lu, Q. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Joint task
offloading, resource allocation and model placement for ai as a
service in 6g network,”IEEE Transactions on Services Computing,
2024.
[29] H. Lu, M. Du, X. He, K. Qian, J. Chen, Y. Sun, and K. Wang, “An
adaptive neural architecture search design for collaborative edge-
cloud computing,”IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 83–89, 2021.[30] B. Lyu, H. Yuan, L. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “Resource-constrained
neural architecture search on edge devices,”IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 134–142, 2021.
[31] Z. Niu, M. Roveri, and G. Casale, “Chainnet: A customized graph
neural network model for loss-aware edge ai service deployment,”
in2024 54th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Depend-
able Systems and Networks (DSN). IEEE, 2024, pp. 238–251.
[32] H. Sedghani, F. Filippini, and D. Ardagna, “Space4ai-d: A design-
time tool for ai applications resource selection in computing
continua,”IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 2024.
[33] H. Sami and A. Mourad, “Dynamic on-demand fog formation
offering on-the-fly iot service deployment,”IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1026–1039, 2020.
[34] M. Tortonesi and L. Foschini, “Business-driven service placement
for highly dynamic and distributed cloud systems,”IEEE Transac-
tions on Cloud Computing, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 977–990, 2016.
[35] X. Tian, H. Meng, Y. Shen, J. Zhang, Y. Chen, and Y. Li, “Dynamic
microservice deployment and offloading for things–edge–cloud
computing,”IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 11, pp.
19 537–19 548, 2024.
[36] H. Sfaxi, I. Lahyani, S. Yangui, and M. Torjmen, “Latency-aware
and proactive service placement for edge computing,”IEEE Trans-
actions on Network and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4243–
4254, 2024.
[37] M. Ji, H. Zhao, L. Jiao, S. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Qian, and B. Ye, “Edge
ai inference as a service via dynamic resources from repeated
auctions,”IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2025.
[38] C. Ying, A. Klein, E. Christiansen, E. Real, K. Murphy, and F. Hut-
ter, “Nas-bench-101: Towards reproducible neural architecture
search,” inInternational conference on machine learning. PMLR,
2019, pp. 7105–7114.
[39] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” inProceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[40] Z. Liu, H. Mao, C.-Y. Wu, C. Feichtenhofer, T. Darrell, and S. Xie,
“A convnet for the 2020s,” inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 11 976–11 986.
[41] Y. Duan, X. Chen, H. Xu, Z. Chen, X. Liang, T. Zhang, and Z. Li,
“Transnas-bench-101: Improving transferability and generalizabil-
ity of cross-task neural architecture search,” inProceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 5251–5260.
[42] L. Liu, S. Zhang, Z. Kuang, A. Zhou, J.-H. Xue, X. Wang, Y. Chen,
W. Yang, Q. Liao, and W. Zhang, “Group fisher pruning for prac-
tical network compression,” inInternational Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 2021, pp. 7021–7032.
[43] M. Lin, P . Wang, Z. Sun, H. Chen, X. Sun, Q. Qian, H. Li, and
R. Jin, “Zen-nas: A zero-shot nas for high-performance image
recognition,” inProceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
on computer vision, 2021, pp. 347–356.
[44] M. Hu, Z. Guo, H. Wen, Z. Wang, B. Xu, J. Xu, and K. Peng, “Col-
laborative deployment and routing of industrial microservices in
smart factories,”IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 2024.
[45] Y. Liu, B. Yang, Y. Wu, C. Chen, and X. Guan, “How to share:
Balancing layer and chain sharing in industrial microservice de-
ployment,”IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 2685–2698, 2022.
[46] Y. Gao, X. Liu, G. Chen, S. Li, and L. Sun, “Mdsga: A limited
resources deployment strategy of microservice-based application
based on genetic algorithm,” in2024 5th International Conference
on Computer Engineering and Application (ICCEA). IEEE, 2024, pp.
746–751.
[47] X. He, H. Xu, X. Xu, Y. Chen, and Z. Wang, “An efficient algorithm
for microservice placement in cloud-edge collaborative computing
environment,”IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 17,
no. 5, pp. 1983–1997, 2024.
[48] X. Dong and Y. Yang, “Nas-bench-201: Extending the scope
of reproducible neural architecture search,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.00326, 2020.
[49] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hintonet al., “Learning multiple layers of
features from tiny images,” 2009.
[50] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, “Im-
agenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in2009 IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee, 2009, pp.
248–255.

